The Project Gutenberg eBook of Free Opinions, by Marie Corelli

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Free Opinions
       Freely Expressed on Certain Phases of Modern Social Life and
       Conduct

Author: Marie Corelli

Release Date: August 18, 2021 [eBook #66079]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Tim Lindell, Martin Pettit and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The Internet
             Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FREE OPINIONS ***

+-------------------------------------------------+
|Transcriber’s note:                              |
|                                                 |
|Obvious typographic errors have been corrected.  |
|                                                 |
+-------------------------------------------------+




FREE OPINIONS

FREELY EXPRESSED




CONSTABLE’S NEW 6/- NOVELS


     _ROBERT W. CHAMBERS._

     IN SEARCH OF THE UNKNOWN.

     _JOHN FOX_ (_Author of “The Little Shepherd of Kingdom Come”_).

     CRITTENDEN.

     _MRS. STEPNEY RAWSON._

     TALES OF RYE TOWN.

     _ERNEST GLANVILLE._

     A ROUGH REFORMER.

     _UNA L. SILBERRAD._

     THE WEDDING OF THE LADY OF LOVELL.

     _HELEN H. COLVILL._

     THE STEPPING STONE.

     _MRS. COMYNS CARR._

     JOHN FLETCHER’S MADONNA.

     _MAY SINCLAIR._

     THE DIVINE FIRE.

LONDON:
ARCHIBALD CONSTABLE & CO. LTD.




FREE OPINIONS

FREELY EXPRESSED

ON

Certain Phases of Modern Social
Life and Conduct


By

MARIE CORELLI

AUTHOR OF “GOD’S GOOD MAN” “TEMPORAL POWER”
“BARABBAS” “THE MASTER CHRISTIAN” ETC


LONDON
ARCHIBALD CONSTABLE & CO LTD
1905




BUTLER & TANNER,
THE SELWOOD PRINTING WORKS,
FROME, AND LONDON.




           A Toi, Sauvage!

     “Si vous voulez combattre,
         Il faut croire d’abord;
     Il faut que le lutteur
         Affirme la justice;
     Il faut, pour le devoir
         Qu’il s’offre au sacrifice,
     Et qu’il soit le plus pur,
         S’il n’est pas le plus fort.”
                          EUGÈNE MANUEL.




CONTENTS

                                                    PAGE
A VITAL POINT OF EDUCATION                             1

THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE PRESS                       14

“PAGAN LONDON”                                        29

A QUESTION OF FAITH                                   38

UNCHRISTIAN CLERICS                                   68

THE SOCIAL BLIGHT                                     79

THE DEATH OF HOSPITALITY                              89

THE VULGARITY OF WEALTH                               98

AMERICAN WOMEN IN ENGLAND                            117

THE AMERICAN BOUNDER                                 128

COWARD ADAM                                          143

ACCURSËD EVE                                         152

“IMAGINARY” LOVE                                     162

THE ADVANCE OF WOMAN                                 169

THE PALM OF BEAUTY                                   185

THE MADNESS OF CLOTHES                               195

THE DECAY OF HOME LIFE IN ENGLAND                    207

SOCIETY AND SUNDAY                                   233

THE “STRONG” BOOK OF THE ISHBOSHETH                  245

THE MAKING OF LITTLE POETS                           252

THE PRAYER OF THE SMALL COUNTRY M.P.                 262

THE THANKSGIVING OF THE SMALL COUNTRY M.P.’S WIFE    267

THE VANISHING GIFT                                   273

THE POWER OF THE PEN                                 292

THE GLORY OF WORK                                    310

THE HAPPY LIFE                                       326

THE SOUL OF THE NATION                               340




AUTHOR’S NOTE


Some of these social papers which are now collected together for the
first time, have appeared before in various periodicals enjoying
a simultaneous circulation in this country and the United States.
Eleven of them were written for an American syndicate, which (for the
purpose of copyright in Great Britain) sold them to a London weekly
journal, wherein they were duly issued. “Pagan London,” however, which
caused some little public discussion, was not included among those
supplied to the American syndicated press, that article having been
written specially for readers in this country as a protest against
Archdeacon Sinclair’s sweeping condemnation of the lax morality and
neglect of religion among the teeming millions that populate our
great English metropolis,--a condemnation which I ventured, and still
venture to think unfair, in the face of the open worldliness, and gross
inattention to the spiritual needs of their congregations on the part
of a very large majority of the clergy themselves. Certain people,
whose brains must be of that peculiar density which is incapable
of receiving even the impression of a shadow of common sense, have
since accused me of attacking “all” the clergy. Such an accusation is
unwarranted and unwarrantable, for no one appreciates more than I do
the brave, patient, self-denying and silent work of the true ministers
of the Gospel, who, seeking nothing for themselves, sacrifice all for
their Master. But it is just these noble clergy whose high profession
is degraded by the ever-increasing tribe of the false hypocrites of
their order, such as those mentioned in “Unchristian Clerics,” all
of whom have come within the radius of my own personal experience. I
readily admit that I have little patience with humbug of any kind,
and that “religious” humbug does always seem to me more like open
blasphemy than what is commonly called by that name. I equally confess
that I have no sympathy with any form of faith which needs continuous
blatant public advertisement in the press of a so-called “Christian”
country--nor do I believe in a Brass-band “revival” of what, if our
religion is religion at all, should never need “reviving.” I have put
forward these views plainly in “The Soul of the Nation,” which appears
for the first time in the present volume.

I have only to add that I attach no other merit to such “opinions” as
will be found in the following pages, than that they are honest, and
that they are honestly expressed, without fear or favour. This is their
only claim upon the attention of the public.

STRATFORD-ON-AVON,
_March, 1905_.




A VITAL POINT OF EDUCATION


In days like these, when the necessity of Education, technical or
otherwise, is strenuously insisted upon by all the learned, worshipful,
governmental and dictatorial personages who “sit” on County Councils,
or talk the precious time recklessly away in Parliament without
apparently arriving at any decision of definite workable good for the
nation, it will not perhaps be considered obtrusive or intrusive if a
suggestion be put forward as to the importance of one point,--


THE NECESSITY OF TEACHING PEOPLE TO READ.

This essential of education is sadly lacking among the general majority
of “educated” persons in Great Britain, and I think I may say America.
Especially among those of the “upper” classes, in both countries.
When we speak of these “upper” classes, we mean of course those, who
by chance or fortune have been born either to such rank or to such
sufficient wealth as to be lifted above the toiling million, and
who may be presumed to have had all the physical, mental and social
advantages that tuition, training and general surroundings can give
them. Yet it is precisely among these that we find the ones who cannot
read, who frequently cannot spell, and whose handwriting is so bad as
to be well-nigh illegible. When it is said that they cannot read,
that statement is not intended to convey the idea that if a book or
newspaper be given to them they do not understand the letters or the
print in which the reading matter is presented to their eyes. They
do. But such letters and such print impress no meaning upon their
minds. Anyone can prove this by merely asking them what they have been
reading. In nine cases out of ten they “don’t know.” And if they ever
did know, during one unusual moment of brain-activity, they “forget.”
The thinking faculty is, with them, like a worn-out sieve, through
which everything runs easily and drops to waste. The news of the day,
be it set forth never so boldly in no matter what startlingly stout
headlines, barely excites their interest for more than a second.
They may perhaps glance at a couple of newspaper placards and lazily
observe, “Russia at it again,” but of the ins and outs of policy, the
difficulties of Government, the work of nations, they grasp absolutely
nothing. Thus it happens that when they are asked their opinion on
any such events of the hour as may be making history in the future,
they display their utter ignorance in such a frankly stupid fashion
that any intelligent enquirer is bound to be stunned by their lack
of knowledge, and will perhaps murmur feebly: “Have you not read the
news?” to which will come the vague reply: “Oh, yes, I read all the
newspapers! But I really don’t remember the particulars just now!” What
they do remember--these “cultured” persons, (and the more highly they
are cultured, the more tenacious appears to be their memory in this
respect)--is a divorce case. They always read that carefully over and
over again. They comment upon it afterwards with such gusto as to make
it quite evident to the merest tyro, that they have learned all its
worst details by heart. If they can only revel in the published shame
and disgrace of one or two of their very “dearest” friends, they enjoy
and appreciate that kind of mental fare more than all the beautiful
poems and idyllic romances ever written.

The “million” have long ago learned to read,--and are reading. The last
is the most important fact, and one which those who seek to govern them
would do well to remember. For their reading is of a most strange,
mixed, and desultory order--and who can say what wondrous new notions
and disturbing theories may not leap out sprite-like from the witch’s
cauldron of seething ideas round which they gather, watching the
literary “bubble, bubble, toil and trouble,” wherein the “eye of newt
and toe of frog” in the book line may contrast with something which is
altogether outside the boiling hotch-potch,--namely that “sick eagle
looking at the sky” which is the true symbol of the highest literary
art. But the highest literary art, particularly in its poetic form, is
at a discount nowadays. And why? Simply because even the million do
not know “how” to read. Moreover, it is very difficult to make them
learn. They have neither the skill nor the patience to study beautiful
thoughts expressed in beautiful language. They want to “rush” something
through. Whether poem, play, or novel, it must be “rushed through” and
done with. Very few authors’ work, if any, can be sure of an honest and
unprejudiced reading, either by those whose business it is to review
it for the press, or those whose pleasure it is to “skim” it for
themselves. “They have no time.” They have time for motoring, cycling,
card-playing, racing, betting, hockey and golf,--anything in short
which does not directly appeal to the intellectual faculties,--but for
real reading, they can neither make leisure, nor acquire aptitude.

This vague, sieve-like quality of brain and general inability to
comprehend or retain impressions of character or events, which is
becoming so common among modern so-called “readers” of books, can but
make things very difficult for authors who seek to contribute something
of their utmost and best to the world of literature. Most men and
women who feel the “divine afflatus,” and who are able to write in a
style above the average, must be conscious of a desire to rise yet
higher than any of their own attempted efforts, and to do something
new, strong, and true enough to hold life and lasting in it when other
contemporary work is forgotten. It is the craving of the “sick eagle
looking at the sky” perhaps, nevertheless it is a noble craving. In
taking an aim, it is as well to let fly at the moon, even if one only
hits a tree. But when fiery-footed Pegasus would fain gallop away with
its rider into the realms of imagination and enchantment,--when the
aspiring disciple of literature, all aglow with freshness and fervour,
strives to catch some new spirit of thought as it rushes past on its
swift wings, or seeks to create some fair consoling idyll of human
circumstance, then all the publishers stand massed in the way and cry
“Halt!” “Don’t let us have any great ideas!” they say--“They are above
the heads of the public. Be domestic--be matrimonially iniquitous,--be
anything in the line of fiction but ‘great.’ Don’t give us new things
to think about,--the public have no time to think. What they want is
just something to glance at between tea and dinner.”

Now this condition of affairs, which is positively disastrous to all
literary art, is brought about by the lack of the one vital point in
the modern education of the British and American people,--namely, that
they have not been taught “how” to read. As a result of this, they
frequently pronounce a book “too long” or “too dull,”--too this, or too
that, without having looked at more than perhaps twenty pages of its
contents. They will skim over any amount of cheap newspapers and trashy
society “weeklies” full of the unimportant movements and doings of he
and she and they, but to take up a book with any serious intention of
reading it thoroughly, is a task which only the thoughtful few will
be found ready to undertake. What is called the appreciation of the
“belles lettres” is indeed “caviare to the general.” Knowledge brings
confidence; and if it were made as much the fashion to read as it is to
ride in motor-cars, some improvement in manners and conduct might be
the happy result of such a prevailing taste. But as matters stand at
the present day, there are a large majority of the “educated” class,
who actually do not know the beginnings of “how” to read. They have
never learned--and some of them will never learn. They cannot realize
the unspeakable delight and charm of giving one’s self up to one’s
author, _sans_ prejudice, _sans_ criticism, _sans_ everything that
could possibly break or mar the spell, and being carried on the wings
of gentle romance away from Self, away from the everyday cares and
petty personalities of social convention, and observance, and living
“with” the characters which have been created by the man or woman whose
fertile brain and toiling pen have unitedly done their best to give
this little respite and holiday to those who will take it and rejoice
in it with gratitude.

Few there are nowadays who will so permit themselves to be carried
away. Far larger is the class of people who take up a novel or a
volume of essays, merely to find fault with it and fling it aside half
unread. The attitude of the bad-tempered child who does not know what
toy to break next, is the attitude of many modern readers. Nothing is
more manifestly unfair to an author than to judge a book by the mere
“skimming” of its pages, and this injustice becomes almost felonious
when the merits or demerits of the work are decided without reading it
at all. For instance, Smith meets Jones in the train which is taking
them out to their respective “little places” in the country, and says:

“Have you read So-and-So’s latest book? If not, don’t!” Whereupon
Jones murmurs: “Really! So bad as all that! Have _you_ read it?”
To which Smith rejoins rudely: “No! And don’t intend! I’ve _heard_
all about it!” And Jones, acquiescing feebly, decides that he must
“taboo” that book, also its author, lest perhaps Mrs. Jones’ virtue
be put to the blush at the mention of either. Now if Smith dared to
condemn a tradesman in this way, and depreciated his goods to Jones
in such wise that the latter should be led to avoid him altogether,
that tradesman could claim damages for injuring his character and
depriving him of custom. Should not the same rule apply to authors when
they are condemned on mere hearsay? Or when their work is wilfully
misrepresented and misquoted in the press?

It may not, perhaps, be considered out of place here to recall a
“personal reminiscence” of the wilful misrepresentation made to a
certain section of the public of a novel of mine entitled “Temporal
Power.” That book had scarcely left the printer’s hands when W. T.
Stead, of the _Review of Reviews_, wrote me a most cordial letter,
congratulating me on the work, and averring that it was “the best”
of all I had done. But in his letter he set forth the startling
proposition that I “must have meant” King Edward, our own gracious
Sovereign, for my “fictional” King, Queen Alexandra for the Queen,
the Prince of Wales for my “Prince Humphry,” and Mr. Chamberlain for
the defaulting Secretary of State, who figures in the story as “Carl
Perousse.” I was so amazed at this curious free translation of my
ideas, that at first I thought it was “Julia” who had thus persuaded
Mr. Stead to see things upside down. But as his criticism of the book
had not yet appeared in the _Review of Reviews_, I wrote to him at
once, and earnestly assured him of the complete misapprehension he
had made of my whole scope and intention. Despite this explanation on
my part, however, Mr. Stead wrote and published a review of the book
maintaining his own fabricated “case” against me, notwithstanding
the fact that he held my denial of his assertions in his possession
_before_ the publication of his criticism! And though a dealer in
meat, groceries, and other food stuffs may obtain compensation if his
wares are wilfully misrepresented to the buying public, the purveyor
of thoughts or ideas has no remedy when such thoughts or ideas are
deliberately and purposefully falsified to the world through the press.
Yet the damage is surely as great,--and the injury done to one’s honest
intention quite as gratuitous. From this little incident occurring to
myself, I venture to say in reference to the assertion that people do
not know how to read, that if those who “rushed” through the misleading
criticism of “Temporal Power” had honestly read the book so criticized
for themselves, they would have seen at once how distorted was Mr.
Stead’s view of the whole story. But,--while many who had read the book
and _not_ the review, laughed at the bare notion of there being any
resemblance between my fictional hero-king of romance and the Sovereign
of the British Empire, others, reading the review only, foolishly
decided that I must have written some “travesty” upon English royalty,
and condemned the book _without reading it_. This is what all authors
have a right to complain of,--the condemnation or censure of their
books by persons who have not read them. For though there never was so
much reading matter put before the public, there was never less actual
“reading” in the truest and highest sense of the term than there is at
present.

To read, as I take it, means to sit down quietly and enjoy a book in
its every line and expression. Whether it be tragic or humourous,
simple or ornate, it has been written to beguile us from our daily
routine of life, and to give us a little change of thought or mood.
It may please us, or it may make us sad--it may even anger us by
upsetting our pet theories and contradicting us on our own lines of
argument; but if it has taken us away for a time from ourselves, it
has fulfilled the greater part of its mission, and done us a good
turn. Those who have really learned to read, are no encouragers of the
Free Library craze. The true lover of books will never want to peruse
volumes that are thumbed and soiled by hundreds of other hands--he or
she will manage to buy them and keep them as friends in the private
household. Any book, save the most expensive “édition de luxe,” can
be purchased for a few shillings,--a little saving on drugged beer
and betting would enable the most ordinary mechanic to stock himself
with a very decent library of his own. To borrow one’s mental fare
from Free Libraries is a dirty habit to begin with. It is rather like
picking up eatables dropped by some one else in the road, and making
one’s dinner off another’s leavings. One book, clean and fresh from the
bookseller’s counter, is worth half a dozen of the soiled and messy
knock-about volumes, which many of our medical men assure us carry
disease-germs in their too-frequently fingered pages. Free Libraries
are undoubtedly very useful resorts for betting men. They can run in,
glance at the newspapers for the latest “Sporting Items” and run out
again. But why ratepayers should support such houses of call for these
gentry remains a mystery which one would have to pierce through all
the Wool and Wobble of Municipal Corporations to solve. An American
“professor”--(there are so many of them) spoke to me the other day in
glowing terms of Andrew Carnegie. “He’s cute, you bet!” he remarked,
“he goes one better than Pears’ Soap! Pears has got to pay for the
upkeep of his hoardings, but Carnegie plants his down in the shape of
libraries and gets the British ratepayer to keep them all going! Ain’t
he spry!”

Poor British ratepayer! It is to be feared he is easily gulled!
But,--to return to the old argument--if he knew “how” to read--really
knew,--he would not be so easily taken in, even by the schemes of
philanthropy. He would buy his books himself, and among them he might
even manage to secure a copy of a very interesting volume published in
America, so I am given to understand, which tells us how Carnegie made
his millions, and how he sanctioned the action of the Pinkerton police
force in firing on his men when they “struck” for higher wages.

Apropos of America and things American, there is just now a pretty
little story started in the press on both sides of the water, about
British novels and British authors no longer being wanted in the United
States. The Children of the Eagle are going to make their fiction
themselves. All power to their elbows! But British authors will do
themselves no harm by enquiring carefully into this report. It may
even pay some of them to send over a private agent on their own behalf
to study the American book stores, and take count of the thousands of
volumes of British fiction which are selling there “like hot cakes,” to
quote a choice expression of Transatlantic slang. It is quite evident
that the Children of the Eagle purchase British fiction. It is equally
evident that the publishers who cater for the Children of the Eagle
are anxious to get British fiction cheap, and are doing this little
deal of the “No demand” business from an acute sense of urgency. It is
all right, of course! If I were an American publisher and had to pay
large prices to popular British authors for popular British fiction
(now that “piracy” is no longer possible), I should naturally tell
those British authors that they are not wanted in America, and that it
is very good and condescending of me to consider their wares at all.
I should give a well-known British author from £100 to £500 for the
sole American rights of his or her newest production, and proceed to
make £5,000 or £7,000 profit out of it. That kind of thing is called
“business.” I should never suspect the British author of being so base
as to send over and get legal statements as to how his or her book was
selling, or to take note of the thousands of copies stacked up every
day in the stores, to be melted away as soon as stacked, in the hands
of eager purchasers. No! As a strictly honourable person, I should
hope that the British author would stay at home and mind his or her
own business. But let us suppose that the American publisher’s latest
delicate “feeler” respecting the “No demand for British literature”
were true, it would seem that Americans, even more than the British,
require to be taught “how” to read. If one may judge from their own
output of literature, the lesson is badly needed. Ralph Waldo Emerson
remains, as yet, their biggest literary man. He knew “how” to read,
and from that knowledge learned “how” to write. But no American author
has come after him that can be called greater than he, or as great.
Concerning the art of fiction, the present American “make” is, whatever
the immediate “catching on” of it may be, distinctly ephemera of the
utmost ephemeral. Such “literature” would not exist even in America, if
Americans knew “how” to read. What is called the “Yellow Journalism”
would not exist either. Why? Because a really educated reader of things
worth reading would not read it--and it would therefore be a case of
the wicked ceasing to trouble and the weary being at rest.

There is a general complaint nowadays--especially among authors--of
the “decadence” of literature. It is true enough. But the cause of the
“decadence” is the same--simply and solely that people cannot and will
not read. They do not know “how” to do it. If they ever did know in the
bygone days of Dickens and Thackeray, they have forgotten. Every book
is “too long” for them. Yet scarcely any novel is published now as long
as the novels of Dickens, which were so eagerly devoured at one time by
tens of thousands of admiring readers. A short, risky, rather “nasty”
book, (reviewers would call it strong, but that is only a little joke
of theirs,--they speak of this kind of literature as though it were
cheese) finds most favour with the “upper” circles of society in Great
Britain and America. Not so with the “million” though. The million
prefer simpler fare--and they read a good deal--though scarcely in the
right way. It is always more a case of “skimming” than reading. If
they are ever taught the right way to read, they may become wiser than
any political government would like them to be. For right reading makes
right thinking--and right thinking makes right living--and right living
would result in what? Well! For one thing, members of councils and
other “ruling” bodies would be lazier than ever, with less to do--and
the Education Act would no longer be necessary, as the fact of simply
knowing “how” to read, would educate everybody without further trouble.

Dear Sir or Madam,--read! Don’t “skim”! Learn your letters! Study the
pronunciation and meaning of words thoroughly first, and then you may
proceed to sentences. Gradually you will be able to master a whole
passage of prose or poetry in such a manner as actually to understand
it. That will be a great thing! And once you understand it, you may
even possibly remember it! And then,--no matter how much you may have
previously been educated,--your education will only have just begun.

[Illustration: Decoration]




THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE PRESS


Not very long ago a Royal hint was given by one of the wisest and most
tactful among the great throned Rulers of the world, to that other
ruling power which is frequently alluded to as “the Fourth Estate.”
Edward the Seventh, King by the Grace of God over Great Britain and
all the dependencies which flourish under the sign of the Rose,
Shamrock and Thistle, using that courteous and diplomatic manner which
particularly belongs to him, expressed his “hope” that the Gentlemen
of the Press would do their best to foster amity and goodwill between
the British Empire and other nations. Now amongst the many kindly,
thoughtful, sagacious and farsighted things which His Majesty has done
since he ascended the English Throne, that highest seat of honour in
the world--perhaps this mild and friendly suggestion to the Press is
one of the most pointed, necessary and admirable. It is a suggestion
which, if accepted in the frank, manly and magnanimous spirit in
which it has been conveyed, would make for the peace of Europe. Petty
insult often begets serious strife, and the cheap sneer of a would-be
“smart” journalist at another country’s governmental mistakes may lead
to consequences undreamt of in newspaper-office philosophy. Yet the
journalist, as journalist, is scarcely to blame if, in a praiseworthy
desire to give a “selling” impetus to the paper on which he is
employed, he gets up a little bit of speculative melodrama, such as
“German Malignity,” “Russian Trickery,” “Mysterious Movements of the
Fleet,” “French Insult to the King,” “America’s Secret Treaty,” or
“Alarming Eastern Rumours.” He is perhaps not in any way departing
from his own special line of business if he counts on the general
gullibility of the public, though in this matter he is often liable to
be himself gulled. For the public have been so frequently taken in by
mere “sensationalism” in war news and the like, that they are beginning
to view all such rumours with more contempt than credence. Nevertheless
the ambitious little Press boys (for they are only boys in their lack
of discernment, whatever may be their external appearance as grown
men) do not deserve so much reproof for their hot-headed, impulsive
and thoughtless ways as the personages set in authority over them,
whose business it is to edit their “copy” before passing it on to the
printers. _They_ are the responsible parties,--and when they forget the
dignity of their position so much as to allow a merely jejune view of
the political situation to appear in their journals, under flamboyant
headlines which catch the eye and ensnare the attention of the more
or less uninstructed crowd, one naturally deplores the lapse of their
honourable duty. For in this way a great deal of harm may be done and
endless misunderstanding and mischief created. It is quite wrong and
wholly unpatriotic that the newspapers of any country should strive to
foster ill-feeling between conflicting nations or political parties.
When they engage in this kind of petty strife one is irresistibly
reminded of the bad child in the nursery who, seeing his two little
brothers quarrelling, cries out: “Go it, Tom! Go it, Jack! Hit him in
the eye!” and then, when the hit is given and mutual screams follow,
runs to his mother with the news--“Ma! Tom and Jack are fighting!”
carefully suppressing the fact that he helped to set them at it. And
when the trouble begins to be serious, and national recriminations are
freely exchanged, it is curious to note how quickly the Press, on both
sides, assumes the attitude of an almost matronly remonstrance. One
hears in every leading article the “How can you behave so, Jack? What a
naughty boy you are, Tom! Positively, I am ashamed of you both!”

There would be no greater force existing in the world as an aid to
civilization and human fraternity than the Press, if its vast powers
were employed to the noblest purposes. It ought to resemble a mighty
ship, which, with brave, true men at the helm, moves ever on a straight
course, cleaving the waters of darkness and error, and making direct
for the highest shores of peace and promise. But it must be a ship
indeed,--grandly built, nobly manned, and steadily steered,--not a
crazy, water-logged vessel, creaking with the thud of every wave, or
bobbing backwards and forwards uncertainly in a gale. Its position
at the present day is, or appears to be, rather the latter than the
former. Unquestionably the people, taken in the mass, do not rely
upon it. They read the newspapers--but they almost immediately forget
everything in them except the headlines and one or two unpleasant
police cases. And why do they forget? Simply because first of all they
are not sufficiently interested; and, secondly, because they do not
believe the news they read. A working man told me the other day that he
had been saving sixpence a week on two halfpenny papers which he had
been accustomed to take in for the past year. “I found ’em out in ten
lies, all on top of one another, in two weeks,” he candidly explained;
“and so I thought I might as well keep my money for something more
useful. So I started putting the halfpence by for my little kiddie, and
I’m going to stick to it. There’s five shillings in the Savings Bank
already!”

Glancing back to the early journalism of the past century, when Dickens
and Thackeray wrote for the newspapers (“there were giants in those
days”), one cannot help being struck by the great deterioration in the
whole “tone” of the press at the present time, as contrasted with that
which prevailed in the dawn of the Victorian era. There is dignity,
refinement, and power in the leading articles of the _Times_ and other
journals then in vogue, such as must needs have compelled people not
only to read, but to think. The vulgar “personal” note, the flippant
sneer at this, that, or t’other personage,--the monkey-like mockery of
women,--the senseless gibes flung at poets and poetry,--the clownish
kick at sentiment,--were all apparently unknown.

True it is that the _Times_ still holds its own as a journal in
which one may look in vain for “sensationalism” but its position is
rather like that of a grim old lion surrounded by cubs of all sizes
and ages, that yap and snap at its whiskers and take liberties with
its tail. It can be said, however, that all the better, higher-class
periodicals are in the same situation--the yapping and snapping goes
on around them precisely in the same way--“Circulation Five Times as
Large as that of any Penny Morning Journal,” etcetera, etcetera. And
the question of the circulation of any particular newspaper resolves
itself into two points,--first, the amount of money it puts into the
pockets of its proprietors or proprietor,--and secondly, the influence
it has, or is likely to have, on the manners and morals of the public.
The last is by far the most important matter, though the first is
naturally the leading motive of its publication. Herein we touch the
keynote of responsibility. How, and in what way are the majority of
people swayed or affected by the statements and opinions of some one
man or several men employed on the world’s press? On this point it
may perhaps be asked whether any newspaper is really justified in
setting before readers of all ages and temperaments, a daily fare of
suicides, murders, divorce-cases, sudden deaths, or abnormal “horrors”
of every kind to startle, depress or warp the mind away from a sane
and healthful outlook upon life and the things of life in general? A
very brilliant and able journalist tells me that “if we don’t put these
things in, we are so deadly dull!” One can but smile at this candid
statement of inefficiency. The idea that there can be any “lively”
reading in the sorrowful details of sickness, crime or mania, leaves
much room for doubt. And when it is remembered how powerfully the human
mind is affected by suggestion, it is surely worth while enquiring
as to whether the newspapers could not manage to offer their readers
noble and instructive subjects of thought, rather than morbid or
degrading ones. Fortunately for all classes, the bulk of what may be
called “magazine literature” makes distinctly for the instruction and
enlightenment of the public, and though a “gutter press” exists in
Great Britain, as in America, a great portion of the public are now
educated enough to recognize its type and to treat it with the contempt
it merits. I quote here part of a letter which recently appeared in the
_Westminster Gazette_ signed “Observer,” and entitled:


     “A PRESS-GOVERNED EMPIRE.

     “To the Editor of the _Westminster Gazette_.

     “SIR,--We have it on the highest authority that the Government
     acts on the same information as is at the disposal of ‘the man in
     the street’ (_vide_ Mr. Balfour at Manchester). The man in the
     street obviously must depend on the Press for his information. How
     has the Press served him?

     “Let me take a recent illustration. A great experiment was
     to be made by the Navy. A battleship with all its tremendous
     armament was to pound a battleship. Naturally the Press was well
     represented, and the public was eager for its report.

     “In due course a narrative appeared describing the terrible havoc
     wrought. The greatest stress was laid upon the instant ignition
     and complete destruction by fire of all the woodwork on the doomed
     ship. Elaborate leading articles appeared enforcing the lesson
     that wood was no longer a possible material for the accessory
     furniture of a battleship.

     “A day or two after, a quiet answer in the House of Commons from
     Mr. Goschen informed the limited public who read it, that no fire
     whatever had occurred on the occasion so graphically described by
     the host of Press correspondents.

     “The events dealt with on these occasions took place in our own
     country, and under our own eyes, so to speak. If such untrue
     reports are set forth with the verisimilitude of accurate and
     detailed personal description of eye-witnesses, what are we to say
     of the truth in the reports of events occurring at a distance?

     “Special knowledge, special experience long continued, speaking
     under a sense of responsibility, are set at nought. The regular
     channels of information are neglected, and the conduct of affairs
     is based on newspaper reports. Any private business conducted
     and managed on these lines would be immediately ruined. The
     business of the Empire is more important, and the results of its
     mismanagement are more serious. For how long will it be possible
     to continue its management, trusting to the light thrown on events
     by an irresponsible Press?”

                *       *       *       *       *

The “irresponsibility” here complained of comes out perhaps more often
and most glaringly in those papers which profess to chronicle the
sayings and doings of kings and queens, prime ministers, and personages
more or less well known in the world of art, letters and society. In
nine cases out of ten, the journalist who reports these sayings and
doings has never set eyes on the people about whom he writes with such
a free and easy flippancy. Even if he has, his authority to make their
conversation public may be questioned. It is surely not too much to ask
of the editors of newspapers that they should, by applying directly to
the individuals concerned, ascertain whether such and such a statement
made to them is true before giving it currency. A couple of penny
stamps expended in private correspondence would settle the matter to
the satisfaction of both parties.

“Personalities,” however, would seem to be greatly in vogue. Note the
following:

“At seven o’clock the King left the hotel and walked to the spring to
drink more of the water. Altogether, His Majesty has to drink about a
quart of the water every morning, before breakfast.

“Standing among the throng, in which every type and nationality of
humanity was represented, the King sipped his second pint glass of
water.

“After drinking the quart of water, the regulations laid down for the
‘cure’ further require the King to walk for two hours before eating a
morsel of food.

“This His Majesty performed by pacing up and down the promenade from
the Kruez spring at one end, to the Ferdinand spring at the other.

“Notwithstanding all the appeals of the local authorities to the
visitors, King Edward was[1]_much greatly_ inconvenienced by the
snobbish curiosity of the crowd.”

One may query whether “the snobbish curiosity of the crowd” or the
snobbish information as to how “the King sipped his second pint glass
of water” was the more reprehensible. Of course there are both men and
women who delight in the personalities of the Press, especially when
they concern themselves. Many ladies of rank and title are only too
happy to have their dresses described to the man in the street, and
their physical charms discussed by Tom, Dick and Harry. And when the
Press is amiable enough to oblige them in these little yearnings for
personal publicity, let us hope that the labourer, being worthy of his
hire, hath his reward.

The following extract, taken from a daily journal boasting a large
circulation, can be called little less than a pandering to the lowest
tastes of the abandoned feminine snob, as well as a flagrant example
of the positively criminal recklessness with which irresponsible
journalists permit themselves to incite, by their flamboyant praise
of the _demi-mondaine_, the envy and cupidity of thoughtless girls
and women, who perhaps but for the perusal of such tawdry stuff,
would never have known of, or half-unconsciously coveted the
dress-and-diamond gew-gaws which are the common reward of female
degradation and dishonesty:


     “Miss W., a young American actress, has burst upon London. She has
     brought back from Paris to the Savoy Hotel, along with her golden
     hair and lovely brown eyes, an enormous jewel-case, innumerable
     dress-baskets--and a story. It concerns herself and how she
     made a fortune on the Paris Bourse, and she told it to our
     representative yesterday.

     “She is an American, and was eating candy when she met M. J----
     L----. ‘Ah!’ said he, ‘give up stick and buy stock.’ She ‘took
     the tip,’ she says, and staked her fortune--every penny--on the
     deal. A fortnight later she came back one night to her flat in the
     Avenue du Bois de Boulogne, from the Olympia, where she plays a
     leading part. A telegram from her bankers was waiting. It said:
     ‘You have been successful.’ ‘Next day,’ says Miss W., ‘I called on
     those bankers and picked up the £20,000 I had made.’

                         “INVETERATE GAMBLER.

     “‘Wonderful, wasn’t it?’ said Miss W., and our representative
     agreed that it was. ‘Oh, but it was a mere nothing!’ she said. ‘I
     have gambled since I was seven. Then I used to bet in pop-corn and
     always won. At seventeen I was quite ‘a dab’ at spotting winners
     on the Turf.

     “‘Monte Carlo? Oh, yes. I won a trifle there this year--£800 or
     so. And Trouville! Why, you may not believe it, but I won £4,000
     there this year in a few weeks.

     “‘Of course, I don’t know the tricks of the Stock Exchange, though
     I was once chased by a bull,’ observed Miss W., with a smile.
     ‘Still, I think I’ll stick to it.’

     “Opposite the Bourse is a shop where fashionable Parisians buy
     their furs. She spent £1,600 in a sable coat and hat on the day
     that the Bourse made her. Her other purchases include:--


     Paris hats to the value of £200.
     A robe of baby lamb, £150.
     Fifteen Paquin gowns.
     Two long fur coats.
     Five short fur coats.
     Three sets of furs.


     “She also admits that she bought such trifles in the way of
     jewellery as:--


     A corsage with thirteen large diamonds.
     Eighteen rows of pearls.
     Eighteen diamond rings.
     Two diamond butterflies.
     One emerald ring.
     Several pendants.


     “Diamonds, says Miss W., are the joy of her life. Each night on
     the stage of the Olympia she wears between £30,000 and £40,000
     worth of jewellery.”


The woman who confides her wardrobe list and the prices of her clothes
to a Fleet Street hack of the pen is far gone past recall, but her
manner of misdemeaning herself should not be proclaimed in the Press
under “headings” as if it were news of importance to the country; and
it would not be so proclaimed were the Press entirely, instead of only
partially, in the hands of educated men.

In olden days it would seem that a great part of the responsibility
of the Press lay in its criticism of art and literature. That burden,
however, no longer lies upon its shoulders. Since the people began
to read for themselves, newspaper criticism, so far as books are
concerned, carries little weight. When some particular book secures
a great success, we read this kind of thing about it: “In argument,
intrigue and style it captures the fancy of the masses without
attracting the slightest attention from the critical and discriminating
few whose approval alone gives any chance of permanence to work.” This
is, of course, very old hearing. “The critical and discriminating few”
in Italy long ago condemned Dante as a “vulgar” rhymer, who used the
“people’s vernacular.” Now the much-abused Florentine is the great
Italian classic. The same “critical and discriminating few” condemned
John Keats, who is now enrolled among the chiefest of English poets.
Onslaughts of the bitterest kind were hurled at the novels of Charles
Dickens by the “critical and discriminating few”--in the great writer’s
time--but he “captured the fancy of the masses” and lives in the hearts
and homes of thousands for whom the “critical and discriminating few”
might just as well never have existed. And when we look up the names
of the “critical and discriminating few” in our own day, we find,
strange to say, that they are all disappointed authors! All of them
have-written poems or novels, which are failures. So we must needs pity
their “criticism” and “discrimination” equally, knowing the secret
fount of gall from which these delicate emotions spring. At the same
time, the “responsibility” of the Press might still be appealed to in
literary, dramatic and artistic matters as, for example:

Why allow an unsuccessful artist to criticize a successful picture?

Why ask an unlucky playwright who cannot get even a farce accepted by
the managers, to criticize a brilliant play?

Why depute a gentleman or lady who has “essayed” a little unsuccessful
fiction to “review” a novel which has “captured the fancy of the
masses” and is selling well?

These be weighty matters! Common human nature is common human nature
all the world over, and it is not in common human nature to give
praise to another for qualities we ourselves envy. Every one has
not the same fine endowment of generosity as Sir Walter Scott, who
wrote an anonymous review of Lord Byron’s poems, giving them the most
enthusiastic praise, and frankly stating that after the appearance of
so brilliant a luminary of genius, Walter Scott could no longer be
considered worthy of attention as a poet. What rhymer of to-day would
thus nobly condemn himself in order to give praise to a rival?

May it not, with due respect, be suggested to those who have the
handling of such matters that neither the avowed friends nor the avowed
foes of authors be permitted to review their books?--the same rule
of criticism to apply equally to the works of musicians, painters,
sculptors and playwrights? Neither personal prejudice nor personal
favouritism should be allowed to interfere with the impression produced
on the mind by a work of art. Vulgar abuse and fervid eulogy are
alike out of place. In the productions of the human brain nothing
is wholly bad and nothing is wholly good. Perfection is impossible
of attainment on our present plane of existence. We do not find it
in Nature,--still less shall we find it in ourselves. The critic
can show good in everything if he himself is of a good mind. Or he
can show bad in everything as easily, should his digestion be out
of order. Unfortunately the “wear and tear of life”--to quote the
patent medicine advertisements, wreaks natural havoc on the physical
composition of the gentleman who is perhaps set down to review twenty
novels in one column of print for the trifling sum of a guinea. All
sorts of difficulties beset him. For instance, he may be employed on
a certain “literary” paper which, being the property of the relatives
of a novelist, exists chiefly to praise that novelist, even though it
be curiously called an “organ of English literature,”--and woe betide
the miserable man who dares to praise anyone else! Knowing much of the
ins and outs of the literary grind, I tender my salutations to all
reviewers of books, together with my respectful sympathy. I am truly
sorry for them, and I do not in the least wonder that they hate with
a deadly hatred every scribbling creature who writes a “long” novel.
Because the “pay” for reviewing such a book is never in proportion to
its length, as of course it ought to be. But anyway it doesn’t matter
how much or how little of it is criticized. The bulk of the public do
not read reviews. That is left to the “discriminating few.” And oh,
how that “discriminating few” would love to “capture the fancy of the
masses” if they could only manage to do it! Yet--“Never mind!” they
say, with the tragedian’s glare and scowl--“Our names will be inscribed
upon the scroll of fame when all ye are forgotten!” Dear things! Heaven
grant them this poor comfort in their graves!

One cannot but regret that in these days of wonderful research,
discovery and invention, so little is done to popularize science in the
columns of the daily Press. The majority of the public are appallingly
ignorant of astronomy for instance. Would it not be as interesting to
instruct them in a simple and easy style as to the actual wonders of
the heavens about us, as to fill their minds with the details of a
murder? I hardly like to touch on the subject of geography, for out of
fifteen “educated” persons I asked the question of recently, not one
knew the actual situation on the map, of Tibet. Now it seems to me that
the Press could work wonders in the way of education,--much more than
the “Bill” will ever do. Books on science and learning are often sadly
dull and generally expensive, and the public cannot afford to buy them
largely, nor do they ask for them much at the libraries. If the daily
journals made it a rule to give bright picturesque articles on some
grand old truths or great new discoveries of science, such a course
of procedure would be far more productive of good than any amount of
“Short Sermons” such as we have lately heard discussed in various
quarters. For the Press is a greater educational force than the Pulpit.
In its hands it has the social moulding of a people, and the dignity
of a nation as represented to other nations. There could hardly be a
nobler task,--there can certainly never be a higher responsibility.

[Illustration: Decoration]

FOOTNOTE:

[1] Copied _verbatim_ from the Press report.




“PAGAN LONDON”


London is “a pagan city.” Such was the uncompromising verdict lately
pronounced upon it by the Venerable Archdeacon Sinclair, of great
St. Paul’s. “A pagan city”--he said, or was reported to say--“with
churches glimmering here and there like fairy lamps twinkling in the
spaces of darkness upon a lawn. Like fairy lamps, they serve to show
the darkness rather than to illuminate it.” It was in a manner striking
and curious that the Archdeacon should have chosen such a simile as
“fairy lamps” for the Churches. It was an unconsciously happy hit--no
doubt absolutely unintentional. But it described the Churches of to-day
with marvellous exactitude. They are “fairy lamps”--no more!--only
fit for show--of no use in a storm--and quenched easily with a
strong puff of wind. Fairy lamps!--not strong or steady beacons--not
lighthouses in the rough sea of life, planted bravely on impregnable
rocks of faith to which the drowning sailor may cling for rescue and
haply find life again. Fairy lamps! Multiply them by scores, good
Archdeacon!--quadruple them in every corner of this “pagan” city of
ours, over which the heart of every earnest thinker must yearn with a
passion of love and pity, and they shall be no use whatever to light
the blackness of one soul’s midnight of despair! “Pagan London!” The
roaring, rushing crowd--the broad deep river of suffering, working,
loving, struggling humanity, sweeping on, despite itself, to the
limitless sea of Death,--every unit in the mass craving for sympathy,
praying for guidance, longing for comfort, trying to discover ways out
of pain and grief, and hoping to find God somehow and somewhere--and
naught but “fairy lamps”--twinkling doubtfully, making the gloom more
visible, the uncertainty of the gathering shadows more confusing and
misleading!--“fairy lamps” of which the “Church of the Laodiceans,” so
strongly reproved by the “Spirit” in the Revelation of St. John the
Divine, must have been the originator and precursor--“I know thy works,
that thou art neither cold nor hot; I would thou wert cold or hot. So,
because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee
out of my mouth!”

It is perhaps to be doubted whether any Churchman, no matter how
distinguished, learned, fashionable or popular, has the right to call
London or any city which is under the Christian dispensation “pagan.”
No one man can honestly say he has probed the heart of another,--and
if this be true, as it undoubtedly is, still less can one man assume
to judge the faith or the emotions of six million hearts--six million
striving, working and struggling souls. That even a handful of the
six million should still wander towards “fairy lamp” Churches, in
the hope to find warmth and luminance for their poor lives in such
flickering and easily quenched sparks of life, speaks volumes for the
touching faith, the craving hope, the desire of ultimate good, which
animates our “pagan” citizens. For, if after two thousand years of
Christianity, some of them are still passionately asking to be taught
and guided, still praying for strength and courage to fight against
many natural besetting sins, and still seeking after such pure ideals
of work and attainment as can alone make life worth living, it is not
they, surely, who merit the term “pagan.” They should not be so much
blamed as compassionated, if, when searching for God’s fair and open
sunshine, they only stumble at the “fairy lamps,” and, angered thereby,
turn altogether away into the outer darkness. Such a term as “pagan”
can be applied with far more justice to their teachers and preachers,
who, having all the means of help and consolation at their disposal,
fail to perform their high duties with either power, conviction or
effect. It is quite easy to say “Pagan London,” but what if one spoke
of “pagan clergy”? What of certain ecclesiastics who do not believe
one word of the creed they profess, and who daily play the part of
Judas Iscariot over again in taking money for a new betrayal of Christ?
What of the ordained ministers of Christianity who are un-Christian
in every word and act of their daily lives? What of the surpliced
hypocrites who preach to others what they never even try to practise?
What of certain vicious and worldly clerical _bon-vivants_, who may
constantly be met with in the houses of wealthy and titled persons,
“clothed in fine linen and faring sumptuously every day,” talking
unsavoury society scandal with as much easy glibness as any dissolute
“lay” decadent that ever cozened another man’s wife away from the path
of honour in the tricky disguise of a “Soul”? What of the spiteful,
small-minded, quarrelsome “local” parsons, who, instead of fostering
kindness, neighbourliness, goodwill and unity among their parishioners,
set them all by the ears, and play the petty tyrant with a domineering
obstinacy which is rather worse than pagan, being purely barbarous?
Many cases could easily be quoted where the childish, not to say
querulous, pettiness of the ruling vicar of a country parish has helped
to narrow, coarsen, and deteriorate the spirit of a whole community,
spreading mean jealousies, fostering cheap rivalries, and making every
soul in the place, from Sunday school children up to poor workhouse
octogenarians, irritable, discontented and unhappy. And if the word
“pagan” be used at all, should it not be particularly and specially
applied to those theatrical dignitaries of the Church whose following
of the simple and beautiful doctrine of Christ consists in sheer
disobedience to His commands--disobedience openly displayed in the
ornate ritual and “vain repetitions” which Christ expressly forbade.
“For all their works they do to be seen of men; they make broad their
phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their garments.” And while
“enlarging the borders of their garments” they institute “processional”
services and promenades round the “fairy lamp” churches, with various
altar-bobbings and other foolish ceremonies, caring nothing for the
_Spirit_ of the faith, if only all forms and observances, imported
from Rome, or from still older “pagan” rites than the Roman, namely,
the Græco-Egyptian, may be in some way introduced into the simple and
unaffected form of prayer authorized by the Church of England. Disloyal
to both God and the King, the “pagan clergy” are doing more at this
present day to injure the cause of true religion among the masses than
is any lack of zeal or want of faith that may exist in the people
themselves. Who can blame sensible men and women for staying away from
church, when in nine cases out of ten they know that the officiating
minister is less Christian, less enlightened, less charitable and
kind-hearted than themselves? Canon Allen Edwards, in an admirable
letter addressed to the Press, put the case of “pagan London” very
clearly. He says: “We do not want new churches.” True. No more “fairy
lamps” are required for the general misleading of the straying sheep.
He adds: “We want new men.”

This is the real need--men! Men of thought--men of heart,--men of
true conviction, ardent faith, passionate exaltation, and unceasing
devotion,--men who will not play about with “show” services, like
amateur actors in a charity performance,--but who will sincerely care
for and sympathize with their fellow-creatures, and will offer up the
prayer and praise of humanity to an all-wise Omnipotence with that deep
heartfelt fervour which is always expressed in the utmost simplicity
of form and language,--men who have the intelligence to understand
intelligent people, and who are as able to deal sympathetically
with the spiritual troubles and perplexities of an educated person
as with those of the ill-taught and frequently ill-fed rustic,--men
who, if they preach, can find something to say of the marvels of this
God-born creation of which we are a part--who will teach as well as
admonish,--and who will take reverent care not to set the Almighty
Creator within a small circle of their own special form of orthodoxy,
and condemn every creature that wanders outside that exclusive “fairy
lamp” enclosure. Canon Allen Edwards further remarked that “The reason
why the working classes do not go to church is the same reason why I
do not go to the Derby, not because I think it wrong, for I have no
opinion on the subject, but because I have no interest in the things
that go on there. And this is the reason, and no other, why many men
do not go to church. They are not interested in what is done there....
A large number of those who are going into the ministry to-day are,
for one most essential part of their work, entirely without the first
elements of equipment. They cannot preach, and they are not helped to
try and learn, and yet preaching is that very part of their work for
which the people expect, and have a right to expect, equipment of the
highest order.”

The Canon says: “they cannot preach.” That is true enough, but why?
I maintain that if they _felt_ their mission, they could preach it.
If they loved their fellow-creatures a thousand times better than
themselves, as they should do, they would find much of greatness,
beauty and truth to say! If they honoured and worshipped their Divine
Master as they profess to honour and worship Him, there would be little
lack of spirit or of eloquence! People always know when a speaker or a
preacher is _in earnest_. He may have a faulty utterance--his elocution
may be far from perfect, but if the _heart_ attunes the voice, the
voice carries. There are many hundreds of noble clergy--but they are
fewer than the ignoble of the same calling. And many there are, not
only ignoble in themselves, but who attempt to pervert their very
churches to illegitimate uses. I quote the following from a letter
addressed to me on one occasion by a notorious “minister” of the Gospel.

“As the vicar of one of the largest parishes in England, I am often
put to it how best to attract to the church the careless and the
indifferent. Though a very strong High Anglican, I am an intense
believer in the Priesthood of the Laity. It is the one weak spot in
the Church’s system that she does not, as do the non-conformists, make
sufficient use of and properly appreciate the services of her lay
members. It has occurred to me therefore this year that by way of a
start in this direction I should ask the help of certain leading people
in the Literary, Dramatic and Artistic worlds. My friend, Mrs. X.,
has already made a beginning by reciting two poems in my Church, and
thereby moving intensely a congregation of upwards of 3,000 people.”
Now Mrs. X. was, and is, a well-known actress, and she recited the
two poems in question _from the chancel steps at the conclusion of
the Sunday evening service_. I am told, (though for this I will not
vouch,) that money was taken at the church doors, and seats reserved
and paid for, precisely as if the sacred building had been suddenly
metamorphosed into a theatre or music hall. It never seemed to occur to
the reverend gentleman who is the proprietor of this once “consecrated”
building, that if he could not attract to his church “the careless
and indifferent,” the fault probably lay in himself and his general
unfitness. As a “very strong High Anglican” he would naturally have
leanings towards the theatre and its lime-light effects, and _certes_,
the “Priesthood of the Laity,” whatever may be meant by that term, is
more to be believed in than the Priesthood of this particular ordained
“priest” who instituted and encouraged a kind of stage recital from the
steps of a sacred chancel, where the actor or actress concerned was
invited to declaim his or her lines, with back turned to the Altar, the
Communion-table serving as the “scenery.” Such men as these are the
real “pagans,” and they do infinite harm to the dignity and purity of
the Christian doctrine by their unworthy and debasing example. Churches
under their dominance are less than “fairy lamps” in their influence
for good,--they are the mere flare of stage footlights, showing up the
grease-paint and powder of the clerical mime.

A deep religious sentiment lies at the hearts of the British people,
as indeed of all peoples in the world. No nation, small or great,
was ever entirely given over to atheism. If atheism and indifference
affect a few, or even a majority of persons, the fault is assuredly
with those who are elected to teach “the Way, the Truth, and the Life.”
They are chosen and solemnly ordained to be the friends, lovers and
guides of humanity,--not to be selfish pedants, quarrelsome quidnuncs,
and bigoted despots, exposing themselves, as they often do, to the
righteous scorn, as well as to the careless contempt of the more honest
laity. When they show themselves unworthy, the people fall away. When
even one minister of religion appears as co-respondent in a divorce
case, tens of thousands of men and women turn their backs on the
Church. When anything low, mean, despicable or treacherous is said or
done by a professing “servant of Christ,” the evil word or deed from
such a source makes Christianity a byword to many more than the merely
profane. When certain great dignitaries of the Church sit wine-bibbing
at “swagger” dinner-parties, relating questionable or “spicy” anecdotes
unfitting for the ears of decent women, they lose not only caste
themselves, but they lay all the brethren of their order open to
doubt. “Example is better than precept.” We have all written that in
our school copy-books,--and nothing has ever happened, or ever will
happen, that is likely to contradict the statement. If London is indeed
a “pagan” city, as Archdeacon Sinclair has solemnly declared from
under the shadowy luminance of his own big “fairy lamp,” St. Paul’s
Cathedral, then the clergy, and the clergy alone are responsible. On
their “ordained” heads be it! For “pagan” people are merely the natural
outcome of a “pagan” priesthood.

[Illustration: Decoration]




A QUESTION OF FAITH

PROPOUNDED TO ALL WHOM IT MAY CONCERN


Before fully entering on this paper, I should like those who may be
inclined to read it to understand very distinctly, once and for all,
that I am a Christian. I am sorry that the too-hasty misjudgment of
others compels me to assert the fact. The term “Atheist” has been
applied to me by several persons who should know better,--for it is an
absolutely false, and I may add, libellous accusation. That it has been
uttered unthinkingly and at random, by idle chatterers who have never
read a line I have written I can well believe,--nevertheless it is a
mischievous rumour, as senseless as wicked. Poor and inadequate as my
service is, and must ever be, still I am a follower of the Christian
Faith, as expounded in Christ’s own words to His disciples. I believe
that Christian Faith to be the grandest and purest in the world,--the
most hopeful, the most strengthening, the most soul-supporting and
ennobling religion ever taught to humanity. To me, in hours of the
bitterest trial, it has proved not “a reed shaken by the wind,”--but
a rock firmer than the foundations of the world, against which the
waves of tribulation break in vain and disperse to naught,--and when
brought face to face with imminent death as I have been, it has kept me
fearless and calm. I know--because I have experienced,--its priceless
worth, its truth, its grand uplifting power; and it is because this
simple Christian Faith is so dear to me, and so much a part of my
every-day life, that I venture to ask a few straight questions of
those who, calling themselves Christians, seem to have lost sight
altogether of their Master and His commands. I like people who are
consistent. Inconsistency of mind is like uncleanliness of body; it
breeds discomfort and disease. And in this wonderful age of ours, in
which there is so little real “greatness,”--when even the tried heroism
of our leading statesmen and generals is sullied by contemptible
jealousies and petty discussions of a quarrelsome nature,--when the
minds of men are bent chiefly on money-making and mechanical inventions
to save labour (labour being most unfortunately estimated as a curse
instead of the blessing it indubitably is), I find inconsistency the
chief ingredient of all modern thought. Things are jumbled up in a
heterogeneous mass, without order, distinction or merit. And the
principal subject on which men and women are most wildly, glaringly
inconsistent, is that which is supposed to be the guiding rule of
life--Religion. I should like to try and help to settle this vexed
question. I want to find out what the Christian Empire means by its
“faith.” I venture to lift up my voice as the voice of one alone in
the wilderness, and to send it with as clear a pitch and true a tone
as I can across the sea of discussion,--the stormy ocean of angry and
contradictory tongues,--and I ask bluntly and straightly, “What is it
all about? DO YOU BELIEVE YOUR RELIGION, OR DO YOU NOT?”

It is an honest question, and demands an honest answer. Put it to
yourselves plainly. DO YOU BELIEVE WITH ALL YOUR HEART AND SOUL IN THE
FAITH YOU PROFESS TO FOLLOW?

Again--put it with equal plainness--DO YOU NOT BELIEVE ONE IOTA OF IT
ALL? AND ARE YOU ONLY FOLLOWING IT AS A MATTER OF CUSTOM AND FORM?

Let us, my reader or readers, be round and frank with each other. If
you are a Christian, your religion is to believe that Christ was a
human Incarnation or Manifestation of an Eternal God, born miraculously
of the Virgin Mary; that He was crucified in the flesh as a criminal,
died, was buried, rose again from the dead, and ascended to heaven as
God and Man in one, and there perpetually acts as Mediator between
mankind and Divine Justice. Remember, that if you believe this, you
believe in the PURELY SUPERNATURAL. But let any one talk or write of
the purely supernatural as existent in any other form save this one of
the Christian Faith, and you will probably be the first to scout the
idea of the supernatural altogether. Why? Where is your consistency? If
you believe in one thing which is supernatural, why not in others?

Now let us consider the other side of the question. You who do
not believe, but still pretend to do so, for the sake of form and
conventional custom, do you realize what you are? You consider yourself
virtuous and respectable, no doubt; but facts are facts, and you, in
your pretence at faith, are nothing but a Liar. The honest sunshiny
face of day looks on you, and knows you for a hypocrite--a miserable
unit who is trying in a vague, mad fashion to cheat the Eternal Forces.
Be ashamed of lying, man or woman, whichever you be! Stand out of the
press and say openly that you do not believe; so at least shall you be
respected. Do not show any religious leanings either to one side or the
other “for the sake of custom”--and then we shall see you as you are,
and refrain from branding you “liar.” I would say to all, clergy and
laity, who do not in their hearts believe in the Christian Faith, “Go
out of all churches; stand aside and let us see who is who. Let us have
space in which to count up those who are willing to sacrifice all their
earthly well-being for Christ’s sake (for it amounts to nothing less
than this), and those who prefer this world to the next.” I will not
presume to calculate as to which will form the larger majority. I only
say it is absurd to keep up churches, and an enormous staff of clergy,
archbishops, bishops, popes, cardinals, and the like, for a faith in
which we do not TRULY, ABSOLUTELY, AND ENTIRELY BELIEVE. It is a mere
pageant of inflated Falsehood, and as such must be loathsome in the
sight of God,--this always with the modern proviso, “if there indeed be
a God.” Yet, apart from a God altogether, it is degrading to ourselves
to play the hypocrite with the serious facts of life and death.
Therefore, I ask you again--Do you believe, or do you not believe? My
object in proposing the question at all is to endeavour to show the
spiritual and symbolic basis upon which the Christian Faith rests,
and the paramount necessity there is for accepting it in its pristine
purity and beauty, if we would be wise. To grasp it thoroughly, we
must view it, not as it now seems to look to us through the darkening
shadows of sectarianism, BUT AS IT WAS ORIGINALLY FOUNDED. The time
has come upon us that is spoken of in the New Testament, when “one
shall be taken and the other left,” and the sorting of the sheep from
the goats has already commenced. It can be said with truth that most
of our Churches, as they now exist, are diametrically opposed to the
actual teachings of their Divine Founder. It can be proved that in our
daily lives we live exactly in the manner which Christ Himself would
have most sternly condemned. And when all the proofs are put before
you plainly, and without disguise or hyperbole, in the simplest and
straightest language possible, I shall again ask you, “DO YOU BELIEVE,
OR DO YOU NOT BELIEVE?” If you do believe, declare it openly and live
accordingly; if you do not believe, in God’s name leave off lying!

The Symbolism of the Christian Faith has been, and is still, very much
lost sight of, owing to the manner in which the unimaginative and
unthinking majority of people will persist in looking at things from a
directly physical, materialistic and worldly point of view. But if we
take the life and character of Christ as a Symbolic representation of
that Perfect Manhood which alone can be pleasing to God,--which alone
can be worthy to call the Divine Source of Creation “Father!”--some of
our difficulties may possibly be removed. Christ’s Gospel was first
proclaimed in the East,--and the Eastern peoples were accustomed to
learn the great truths of religion by a “symbolic,” or allegorical
method of instruction. Christ Himself knew this,--for “He taught them
many things by parables.”

We shall do well to keep this spirit of Eastern symbolism in mind when
considering the “miraculous” manner of Christ’s birth. Note the extreme
poverty, humility, well-nigh shame attending it! Joseph doubted Mary,
and was “minded to put her away privily.” Mary herself doubted the
Angelic Annunciation, and said, “How shall this be?”

Thus, even with those most closely concerned, a cloud of complete
disbelief and distrust environed the very thought, suggestion, and
announcement of the God-in-Man.

It should be remembered that the Evangelists, Mark and John, have no
account of a “miraculous” birth at all. John, supreme as a Symbolist,
the “disciple whom Jesus loved,” wrote, “The WORD was made flesh and
dwelt among us.”

Securing this symbolic statement for ourselves, we find that two of the
chief things to which we attach importance in this world--namely, birth
and position--are altogether set aside in this humanizing of the WORD,
and are of no account whatever. And, that the helpless Child lying in
a manger on that first Christmas morning of the world, was,--despite
poverty and humility,--fore-destined to possess more power than all the
kings and emperors ever born in the purple.

Thus, the first lessons we get from the birth of Christ are--Faith and
Humility--these are indeed the whole spirit of His Divine doctrine.

Now,--How does this spirit pervade our social community to-day, after
nearly two thousand years of constant preaching and teaching?

Look round on the proud array of the self-important, pugnacious,
quarrelsome, sectarian and intolerant so-called “servants of the Lord.”
The Pope of Rome, and his Cardinals and his Monsignori! The Archbishop
of Canterbury, and _his_ Bishops, Deacons, Deans and Chapters and the
like! The million “sects”--and all the cumbrous paraphernalia of the
wealthy and worldly, “ordained” to preach the Gospel! Ask them for
“proofs” of faith! For signs of “humility”! For evidences of any kind
to show that they are in very soul and life and truth, the followers of
that Master who never knew luxury, and had not where to lay His head!

And you, among the laity, how can you pray, or pretend to pray to a
poor and despised “Man of Sorrows,” in these days, when with every act
and word of your life you show your neighbours that you love Money
better than anything else in earth or in heaven!--when even you who are
millionaires only give and do just as much as will bring you notoriety,
or purchase you a “handle” to your names! Why do you bend your
hypocritical heads on Sundays to the Name of “Jesus,” who (so far as
visible worldly position admitted) was merely the son of a carpenter,
and followed the carpenter’s trade, while on week-days you make no
secret of your scorn of, or indifference to the “working-man,” and more
often than not spurn the beggar from your gates!

Be consistent, friends!--be consistent! IF YOU BELIEVE IN
CHRISTIANITY, you must also believe in these three things:--


     1. The virtue of poverty.

     2. The dignity of labour.

     3. The excellence of simplicity.


Rank, wealth, and all kinds of ostentation should be to you
pitiable--not enviable.

IS IT SO? Do you prefer poverty, with a pure conscience, to ill-gotten
riches? Would you rather be a faithful servant of Christ or a slave of
Mammon? Give the answer to your own soul,--but give it honestly--if you
can!

If you find, on close self-examination, that you love yourself, your
own importance, your position, your money, your household goods and
clothes, your place in what you call “society,” more than the steady
working for and following of Christ,--YOU ARE NOT A CHRISTIAN. That
being the case, be brave about it! Say what you are, and do not pretend
to be what you are not!

It ought to be quite easy for you to come to a clear understanding
with yourselves. Take down the New Testament and read it. Read it as
closely and carefully as you read your cheap newspapers, and with
as much eagerness to find out “news.” For news there is in it, and
of grave import. Not news affecting the things of this world, which
pass like a breath of wind and are no more,--but news which treats of
Eternal Facts, outlasting the creation and re-creation of countless
worlds. Read this book for yourselves, I say, rather than take it in
portions on Sundays only from your clergy,--and devote your earnest
attention to the simple precepts uttered by Christ Himself. If you
are a Christian, you believe Christ was an Incarnation of God,--then
does it not behove you to listen when God speaks? Or is it a matter
of indifference to you that the Maker and Upholder of millions of
universes should have condescended to come and teach you how to live?
If it is, then stand forth and let us see you! Do not attend places of
worship merely to be noticed by your neighbours. For,--apart from such
conduct being strictly forbidden by Christ,--you insult other persons
by your presence as a liar and hypocrite. This is what you may call a
“rude” statement;--plain-speaking and truth-telling are always called
“rude.” You will find the utmost plain-speaking in the Gospels upon
which you profess to pin your faith. If you have any “fancy Ritualism”
lurking about you, you will discover that “forms” are not tolerated by
the Saviour of mankind.

“All their works they do for to be seen of men; they make broad their
phylacteries and enlarge the borders of their garments.”

“Shows” of religion are severely censured and condemned by Him whose
commands we assume to try and obey--we can scarcely find even a peg
whereon to hang an excuse for our practice of praying in public, while
“vain repetitions” of prayer are expressly prohibited. I repeat--Read
the Four Gospels; they are very much mis-read in these days, and even
in the Churches are only gabbled. See if your private and personal
lives are in keeping with the commands there set down. If not, cease to
play Humbug with the Eternities;--they will avenge themselves upon your
hypocrisy in a way you dream not of! “Whosoever excuses himself accuses
himself.”

The true Christian faith has no dogma,--no form,--no sect. It starts
with Christ as God-in-Man, in an all-embracing love for God and His
whole Creation, with an explicit and clear understanding (as symbolized
so emphatically in the Crucifixion and Resurrection), that each
individual Soul is an immortal germ of life, in process of eternal
development, to which each new “experience” of thought, whether on
this planet or others, adds larger powers, wider intelligence, and
intensified consciousness. There are no “isms” in this faith--no
bigotry, and no intolerance. It leaves no ground for discussion.

“This is my commandment,--That ye love one another as I have loved you.”

It is all there,--simple, straight and pure--no more, no less than this.

“Love feels no burden, thinks nothing of trouble, attempts what
is above its strength, pleads no excuse of impossibility. It is,
therefore, able to undertake all things, and it completes many things
and warrants them to take effect where he who does not love would faint
and lie down. Love is watchful, and, sleeping, slumbereth not. Though
weary, it is not tired; though alarmed, it is not confounded, but, as a
lively flame and burning torch, it forces its way upwards, and securely
passes all.... Love is born of God and cannot rest but in God, above
all created things.”

Is our Gospel of modern life and society to-day one of love or of hate?
Do we help each other more readily than we kick each other down? Do we
prefer to praise or to slander our neighbours? Is it not absolutely
true that “a cruel story runs on wheels, and every hand oils the wheels
as they run”? Can we leave anybody alone without covert or open
detraction from his or her merits? Even in the most ordinary, every-day
life do we not see people taking a malicious, insane delight in making
their next-door neighbours as uncomfortable as possible in every petty
way they can? These persons, by the way, are generally the class who go
to Church most regularly, and are constant Communicants. Do they not by
their profane attempt to assimilate the malignity of their dispositions
with the gospel of Christ, deserve to be considered as mere blasphemers
of the Faith?

Yet, as a matter of fact, it is much easier to love than to hate. Love
is the natural and native air of the immortal soul. “While we fulfil
the law of love in all our thoughts and actions, we cannot fail to
grow.” Hatred, discontent, envy, and pessimism, cramp all the higher
faculties of the mind and very often actually breed disease in the
body. To love all creation is to draw the responsive health and life of
creation into one’s own immortal cognizance. “Love easily loosens all
our bonds. There is no discomfort that will not yield to its sovereign
power.” But it must not be a selfish love. It must be a Love which is
the keynote of the Christian Faith--“Love one another as I have loved
you.”

It follows very plainly that if we truly loved one another there would
be no wars, no envyings, no racial hatreds, no over-reaching of our
brethren for either wealth, place or power. There would be no such
hells as the Lancashire factories, for example, where, as Allen Clarke
graphically tells us,[2] “Amidst that sickening jerry-jumble of cheap
bricks and cheaper British industry, over a hundred thousand men,
women and children, toil and exist, sweating in the vast, hot, stuffy
mills and sweltering forges--going, when young, to the smut-surrounded
schools to improve their minds, and trying to commune with the living
God in the dreary, dead, besmirched churches and grimy puritanical
chapels; growing up stunted, breeding thoughtlessly, dying prematurely,
knowing not, nor dreaming, except for here and there a solitary one
cursed with keen sight and sensitive soul, of aught better and brighter
than this sickening, steaming sphere of slime and sorrow.” Contrast
this picture with a crowded “supper-night” at the Carlton or any other
fashionable Feeding-place of London, and then maintain, if you dare,
that the men and women who are responsible for two such differing sides
of life are “Christians”!

England is, we are told, in danger of becoming “Romanized.” Priests
and nuns of various “orders” who have been thrust out of France and
Spain for intermeddling, are seeking refuge here, in company with the
organ-grinders and other folk who have been found unnecessary in their
own countries. From Paris official news was cabled on September 11,
1902, as follows:--


     “JESUIT EXODUS FROM FRANCE.

     “PARIS, _Wednesday, September 11_.

     “It is announced officially that by the 1st of next month
     not a single Jesuit will be left in France. Most of them
     are emigrating to England, and will make Canterbury their
     headquarters.--DALZIEL.”


France will not have the Jesuits; may it be asked why _we_ are to have
them? It is England’s proud privilege to be an international workhouse
for all the decrepit of the world, and for this cause a happy hunting
ground is open to Rome among these same decrepit. There is no creed in
the world which is better adapted for those who are morally weak, and
frightened of themselves. All the millionaires who have gotten their
goods by fraud, can, by leaving the greater part of these goods to
Rome, secure a reserved seat in Rome’s Heaven, with a special harp and
crown. All the women with “soul-affinities” other than lawful, can,
after a considerable wallow in social mire, enter the Church of Rome,
and, after confession, be “cleansed” sufficiently to begin again a new
life, approved of the saints. All the spiritualists and faith-healers
can find support for their theories with Rome,--and the Roman hell,
full of large snakes and much brimstone, is a satisfactory place
to consign one’s enemies to, when we have quite put aside Christ’s
command, “Love one another.” Altogether Romanism is calculated to
appeal to a very large majority of persons through the sensuous and
emotional beauty of its ritual;--it is a kind of heavenly narcotic
which persuades the believer to resign his own will into the hypnotic
management of the priests. The church is made gorgeous with soft lights
and colours,--glorious music resounds through the building, and the
mind drowses gently under the influence of the Latin chanting, which
we need not follow unless we like,--we are permitted to believe that
a large number of saints and angels are specially looking after us,
and that the sweet Virgin Mary is ever ready with outstretched hands
to listen to all our little griefs and vexations. It is a beautiful
and fascinating Creed, hallowed by long antiquity, graced by deeds
of romance and chivalry, sanctified by the memories of great martyrs
and pure saints, and even in these degenerate days, glorified by
the noble-hearted men and women who follow it without bigotry or
intolerance, doing good everywhere, tending the sick, comforting the
sorrowful, and gathering up the little children into their protecting
arms, even as Jesus Himself gathered them. It would need an angel’s pen
dipped in fire, to record the true history of a faithful, self-denying
priest of the Roman Church, who gives up his own advantage for the sake
of serving others,--who walks fearlessly into squalid dens reeking
with fever, and sets the pure Host between the infected lips of the
dying,--who combats with the Demon of Drink, and drags up the almost
lost reprobate out of that horrible chasm of vice and destruction.
No one could ever give sufficient honour to such a man for all the
immense amount of good he does, unostentatiously and without hope of
reward. But many men like himself exist equally in the English Church
as the Roman,--in the Presbyterian Church, in the Greek Church, in the
Buddhist temples, among the Quakers, “Plymouth Brethren,” and other
sects--among the followers of Mahomet or of Confucius. For there are
good men and good women in every Church, faithful to the SPIRIT OF
CHRIST, and, therefore, “Christians,” even if called Jews or Hindoos.

Personally, I have no more objection or dislike to Romanism than I
have to any other “ism” ever formulated. From a student’s point of
view I admire the Roman Catholic priesthood, because they understand
their business, and thoroughly know the material with which they have
to deal. Wise as their Egyptian prototypes of old, they decline to
unveil “mysteries” to the uninitiated vulgar--therefore the laity are
not expected to read the Bible for themselves. Knowing the terrors
of a guilty conscience, they are able to intimidate the uneducated
ruffian of both sexes more successfully than all the majesty of the
law. Thoroughly aware of the popular delight in “shows,” they organize
public processions on feast days, just as the “Masters of the Stars”
used to do in Memphis, where, by the way (as those who take the
trouble to study ancient Egyptian records will discover), our latest
inventions, such as the electric light, the telephone, the phonograph,
and many other modern conveniences, were used by the priests for
“miraculous” effects. From the Egyptian priesthood we derive the
beginnings of scientific discovery;--to the early Roman Catholic
priesthood we owe the preservation of much history and learning. The
one is, intellectually speaking, a lineal descendant of the other, and
both deserve the utmost respect for their immense capacity as Rulers of
the Ignorant.

The greater majority of persons have no force of will and no decided
opinions, but only an under-sense of coward fear or vexation at the
possible unsuccessful or damaging result of their own ill-doings. Hence
the power of the Roman Catholic dogma. It is not Christianity; it has
not the delicate subtlety of Greek mythology; it is simply pagan Rome
engrafted on the conversion and repentance of the Jew, Peter, who, in
the time of trial, “knew not the Man.” Curiously enough, it is just the
“Man,” the real typical Christ, the pure, strong God-in-humanity who
is still “not known” in the Roman Catholic ritual. There are prayers
to the “Sacred Heart” and to other physical attributes of Jesus,--just
as in old Rome there were prayers to the physical attributes of
the various deities, but of the perfect “Man,” as seen in Christ’s
dauntless love of truth and exposure of shams, His scourging of the
thieves out of the holy temple, His grand indifference to the world’s
malice and hatred, and His conquest over death and the grave,--of
these things we are given no clear or helpful image. Nevertheless, it
is the “Man” we most need,--the “Man” who came to us to teach us how
to live;--the brother, the friend, the close sympathizer,--the great
Creator of all life mingling Himself with His human creation in a
beautiful, tender, loving, wise and all-pitiful Spirit, wherein is no
hate, no revenge, and no intolerance! This is the Christ;--this is His
Christianity. Romanism, on the contrary, allows plenty of space for
those who want to hate as well as to love, and it is as helpful or as
useless as any of the thousand and one dogmas built up around Christ,
dogmas which include bad passions as well as divine aspirations. The
danger of such a creed gaining too much ground in England, the land
where our forefathers fought against it and trampled it out with
their own blood and tears, is not because it is a particular form of
religious Faith, but because it is an intolerant system of secret
Government. This has been proved over and over again throughout
history. Its leaders have not shown themselves as gentle pagans by any
means, either now or in the past;--and intolerance in any form, from
any sect, is no part of the Constitution of a free country.

Hence the real cause of the objection which has been entertained by
millions of persons in the Empire to the suggested alteration of
the King’s Coronation oath. The British King is a Constitutional
monarch,--and the words “Defender of the Faith” imply that he is
equally Defender of the Constitution. He agrees, when he is crowned
King of England, to uphold that Constitution,--he therefore tacitly
rejects all that might tend to undermine it,--all secret methods of
tampering with political, governmental or financial matters relating
to the State. The wording of the Coronation Oath is, and must be
distinctly offensive to thousands of excellent persons who are Roman
Catholics,--nevertheless, in the times when it was so worded, the
offending terms were made necessary by the conduct of the Roman
Catholics themselves. Those times, we are assured, are past. We have
made progress in education,--we are now broad-minded enough to be
fair to foes, as well as to friends. We should, therefore, in common
courtesy to a rival Church, consent to have this irritating formula
altered. Perhaps we should,--but is it too much to ask our Roman
Catholic brethren that they also should, if they wish for tolerance,
exhibit it on their own side? When Queen Victoria died, was it not
quite as offensive on the part of Pope Leo to publicly state that he
“could not be represented at the funeral of a Protestant Queen”--as it
may be for our King to publicly repudiate the service of the Mass?
Nothing could have been more calculated to gratuitously wound the
feelings of a great People than that most unnecessary announcement
made from an historical religious centre like the Vatican, at a time
of universal grief for the death of a good Monarch. If the Pope’s act
was according to the rule of his Church, the King’s oath is according
to the rule of the British Constitution. No one could accuse the Pope
of any particularly “Christian” feeling in declining to be represented
at the last obsequies of the best Queen that ever reigned--no one can
or would ever conscientiously accuse an English King of “religious
intolerance” when he takes the oath as it is set down for him. Both
acts are matters of policy. We have seen the foremost peer of England,
the Duke of Norfolk, forgetting himself so far on one occasion as
to drag his religious creed into the political arena, and publicly
expressing the hope on behalf of all English Catholics that the Pope
may soon regain temporal power (which means, to put it quite plainly,
that the British Constitution should be disintegrated and laid under
subjection to Rome): the natural consequence of such conduct is that
an enormous majority of perfectly sensible broad-minded people doubt
whether it is wise to leave an entirely loose rein on the neck of
the papal Pegasus. Tolerance and equity on the one side must be met
by tolerance and equity on the other, if a fair understanding is to
be arrived at. And when the professors of any religious Creed still
persecute heroism and intellect, or refuse reverence to the last
rite of a noble Queen, whose long reign was a blessing to the whole
world, one may be permitted to question their fitness for the task
of elevating and refining the minds and morals of those whom their
teachings help to influence. And having, as a man of intellectual
and keen perception, the full consciousness that such unuttered
“questioning” was burning the hearts and minds of thousands, the late
Cardinal Vaughan showed himself a master of the art of Roman Catholic
diplomacy in his speech at Newcastle-on-Tyne on September 9, 1902.
Speaking of the inrush of Roman Catholic priests into England, he
said:--

“A statement from a London paper has been running through the
provincial Press to the effect that I have deliberately outraged
public feeling by inviting to England certain French religieux, some
of those _confrères_ who have made themselves particularly obnoxious
by their constant attacks upon this country. The fact is that, upon
the passing of the iniquitous law against the religious congregations,
I gave a general invitation to any religieux who might wish, to come
to my diocese until they could return to France. Among those who
applied were three or four fathers, some of those _confrères_ who do
not love England. My invitation being general, I was not, and am not
going to make distinctions. None will come who do not intend to obey
the laws and follow my direction. And if there be any who have not
been sufficiently enlightened to appreciate this country while living
in France, they are the very people who had best come and make our
acquaintance. This is the surest way to change their views. But while
England boasts of her generous hospitality to every kind of refugee, I
shall certainly offer whatever hospitality I can to the men and women
who have suffered for Christ’s sake. _I am too broad an Englishman to
know any other policy._”

“Broad Englishman” as the Cardinal professed to be, he had no pity on
the aged Dr. St. George Mivart, the circumstances of whose treatment
are not yet forgotten.

Speaking of the Coronation oath, the Cardinal said: “I entirely and
frankly accept the decision of the country that the King must be a
Protestant. They believe that this is in some way bound up with the
welfare of the Empire. WITHOUT GOING THIS LENGTH, I am convinced that
in the present condition of the English people, HAUNTED AS THEY ARE
BY FEARS AND SUSPICIONS, it is expedient that the King should be of
the religion of the overwhelming majority. Besides, the King being, in
virtue of Royal supremacy, head of the State Church, it is impossible
that he should be other than a Protestant. Catholics have no difficulty
in paying most loyal allegiance to a Protestant Sovereign. In this
they seem to be of more liberal and confiding temper than those who
would refuse allegiance to a King unless he professed their creed. The
Catholic has no difficulty, because he gives his allegiance and his
life, when needed, primarily to the civil power ordained of God.”

(The Cardinal did not pause here to try and explain why God has thus
“ordained” a Protestant sovereign instead of a Roman Catholic one! Yet
no doubt he will admit that God knows best.)

“The Sovereign REPRESENTS THIS POWER, whatever be his religion. Was
it not Catholic Belgium that placed the Protestant King Leopold upon
the Throne, and gave to him at least as hearty a devotion as ever has
been shown to his Catholic successor? Other Catholic States are ruled
by Protestant Sovereigns. And who can say that the 16,000,000 of German
Catholics are a whit less loyal to their German Protestant Emperor
than the millions who are of the Protestant or of no religion? There
are people, I believe, pursued by the conviction that we Catholics
would do anything in the world to get a Catholic King upon the Throne;
that the Pope would give us leave to tell lies, commit perjury, plot,
scheme, and kill to any extent for such a purpose; that there is no
crime we should stick at if the certainty, or even the probability
of accomplishing such an end were in view. Now let me put it to our
Protestant friends in this way. If the King of England were an absolute
Monarch, the dictator of the laws to be enacted, and his own executive,
there might be something of vital importance to our interests and
to those of religion to excite in us an intense desire to have a
Catholic King. Though even then the end could never, even remotely,
justify the means suggested. But how do matters really stand? We have
a Constitutional Monarch who is subject to the laws, and in practice
bound to follow the advice of his Ministers. A Catholic King, under
present circumstances, would be a cause of weakness, of perpetual
difficulty, and of untold anxiety. We are far better off as we are. Our
dangers and grievances, our hopes and our happiness, LIE IN THE WORKING
OF THE CONSTITUTION, not in the favour or power of any Sovereign. IT
IS THE PARLIAMENT, THE HOUSE OF COMMONS, THAT WE MUST CONVERT, or at
least strive to retain within the influence of Christianity. For the
well-being of this country and the salvation of its people depend,
above all other human things, UPON THE VIEW THAT THE HOUSE OF COMMONS
CAN BE GOT TO TAKE OF ITS DUTY--to respect and obey the law of Christ.
What we want is to get the House of Commons to maintain the Christian
laws of marriage as the basis of society, and to secure to parents and
their children a true and proper liberty in the matter of Christian
education. And in this, remember well, THAT THE HOUSE OF COMMONS
DEPENDS NOT UPON THE KING, WHATEVER HIS RELIGION, BUT UPON OURSELVES.
The people of this country must work out their own salvation. And
here let me point out to you, in passing, that the next Session of
Parliament may settle for ever the position of Christianity in this
country. Secondary and middle-class education will be thrown into the
melting-pot. In the process of the devolution of educational authority
upon county councils, Christianity will run the risk of losing rights
which it seems to have almost secured under the working of the
Education Department. The adoption of a single clause or principle
will have far-reaching and most vital results. There will be another
educational struggle. Struggles will be inevitable until the Christian
cause which is becoming more and more openly the cause of the majority
has permanently triumphed.”

Here we have four distinct “moves” on the plan of campaign.


     1. “It is the Parliament, the House of Commons, that we must
     convert.”


This means, that wherever influence can be brought to bear on the
return of Roman Catholic members to the House, that influence will not
be lacking.


     2. “The next Session of Parliament may settle for ever the
     position of Christianity in this country.”


Not CHRISTIANITY, for that is above all “settling,”--save with its
Founder--but that the next or other Sessions may open the way to a more
complete Roman Catholic domination is what is here hoped for.


     3. “The adoption of a _single clause_ or principle will have
     far-reaching and most vital results.”


Precisely;--so far-reaching and vital that England must be on her guard
against even a “single clause or principle” which endangers the liberty
of the subject.


     4. “Struggles will be inevitable until the Christian cause which
     is becoming more and more openly the cause of the majority has
     permanently triumphed.”


For Cardinal Vaughan there was only one “Christian” cause--viz., the
Roman Catholic, and he who runs may read the meaning of the above
phrase without much difficulty.

Concerning the King’s Declaration Oath, said the Cardinal:--

“It is not the King who is responsible for the drafting or the
retention of this detestable Declaration. It is the Ministry, the
Legislature, the Constitution that are responsible for its retention,
and for forcing its acceptance upon the Sovereign. The gravamen,
therefore, lies against the State, not against the person of the King.”

Quite true; and it is therefore against the State that the Vatican
powers must, and possibly may, in time, be directed.

“And,” went on the Cardinal, “do not devout clergymen swear every day
in good faith to teach the Thirty-nine Articles, and find every day
that conscience and good faith compel them to break their engagement by
submitting to the Catholic Church? When a man fully realizes that by a
promise or an oath he has pledged himself to something that is unjust,
immoral, untrue, the engagement ceases to bind.”

_Ergo_, the English Church, the particular “Faith” which our King
undertakes to DEFEND, is “unjust, immoral and untrue.”

And, “Could Englishmen see themselves as others see them, they would be
more chary than they are of provoking hatred by such wanton contempt
for the feelings of other nations.”

Well, Englishmen have every chance of seeing themselves as others see
them, when they have to chronicle a “Christian” Cardinal’s indictment
accusing them of “wanton contempt for the feelings of other nations.”
To whom do other nations turn in want or distress but England? From
whom do the famine and fever-stricken in all corners of the world
obtain relief? England! Where is there any Roman Catholic country that
has poured out such limitless charity and pity to all in sorrow as
England? And why should the “conversion of England” be so valuable to
the Roman Church? Merely because of England’s incalculable wealth and
power!

Again, concerning the Declaration Oath, the Cardinal continued:--“Now,
should it ever happen that the King became convinced, by God’s grace,
of the truth of the doctrines that he abjured, of what value would be
the Declaration? Absolutely none!”

Of course not!--he would simply cease to be King, and would enjoy the
complete liberty of the subject.

“By all means,” went on his Eminence, warming with his theme, “let the
majority, if it please, stand by the law, which exists apart from the
Declaration, declaring that to reign over England the Sovereign must be
a Protestant. Retain this law and enforce it; but respect our creed, at
least just so far as to ignore it, and to leave us alone. This, surely,
is not a heavy demand to make upon the spirit of modern toleration.”

Then why did not the Cardinal and all his followers “respect the
creed” established in this country,--the religion of the State,--“just
so far as to ignore it,” and to leave those who honour it “alone”?
“This, surely, is not a heavy demand to make upon the spirit of
modern toleration.” It was not the Church of England which started
any discussion on the Coronation Oath at the time of King Edward the
Seventh’s crowning,--the quarrel emanated entirely from the Roman
Catholic side. And the Cardinal’s speech was intended to be more
aggressive than pacifying.

“But if,” he continued, “after all, there must be a Declaration _as
a sop to certain fears and passions_, let there be one to the effect
that the King is a Protestant--and stop there. Should, however, a
denunciation of the Catholic religion be added to a profession of
Protestantism, the whole world will understand it; it will understand
it as a pitiable _confession of English fear and weakness_. And as to
ourselves; well, we shall take it as a complimentary acknowledgment
by our Protestant fellow-countrymen of the importance and power of
faith--that it can not only remove mountains, but is capable of _moving
even the fabric of the British Empire itself_. But I should like to
conclude in another strain, and add to these observations a resolution
to this effect:--

“That the Sovereign of this Empire ought to be raised high above the
strife of all political and religious controversies, the more easily to
draw to himself and to retain the unabated loyalty of all creeds and
races within his Empire.”

With the latter part of the Cardinal’s harangue every one of every
creed and class will agree, but “a pitiable confession of English fear
and weakness” is a phrase that should never have been uttered by an
Englishman, whether “broad” or narrow, cardinal or layman. “English
fear and weakness” has never yet been known in the world’s history.
And as for “moving the fabric of the British Empire,” that can only
be done through the possible incompetence or demoralization of its
own statesmen,--by shiftiness, treachery and corruption in State
affairs--and even at this utmost worst, though England might be bent,
she would never be broken.

All this, however, has nothing to do with the Christian faith as Christ
Himself expounded it in His own commands. Quarrels and dissensions are
as far from the teaching of the Divine Master as an earth’s dusthole
is from the centre of the sun. Differences of dogma are not approved
in His eyes. Whether candles shall, or shall not, be set on the altar,
whether incense shall, or shall not, be burnt, may be said to relegate
to the “cleansing of the outside of the cup and platter,” and are not
a vital part of His intention--for He has nothing but condemnation
for “forms” and “ceremonies.” There is something both strange and
unnatural in the provocative spirit which is at present being exercised
by professing rulers of the Church of England against one another;
and another matter too for deep regret is the attitude of favour
maintained by certain political ministers, towards the practice of an
almost theatrical display in the form of English Christian services.
The various appointments of High Churchmen to important bishoprics
shows the tendency towards extravagant ritualism; certainly the more
simple and unaffected men of pure taste and dignity in Church ritual
get little chance of encouragement; and that the path is being prepared
for a second Cromwell is only too evident. It is lamentable indeed that
any discussions should arise between the different sects as to “forms
and ceremonies,” and those who excite fanatical hatreds by their petty
quarrels over unimportant “shows” and observances, are criminally to
blame for any evils that are likely to ensue. What Christ commands is
“Love one another”;--what He desires is that all mankind should be
friends and brothers in His Name. And it is from this point of view
that I again ask the question of those who may have glanced through
this paper--DO YOU BELIEVE, OR DO YOU NOT BELIEVE? Are you a CHRISTIAN?
Or a SECTARIAN? The one is not the other.

For my own part I would desire to see all the Sects cease their long
quarrel,--all “dogmas” dropped--and all creeds amalgamated into one
great loving family under the name of Christ. I should like to see
an end to all bigotry, whether of Protestantism against Romanism, or
Romanism against Protestantism,--a conclusion to all differences--and
one Universal Church of simple Love and Thanksgiving, and obedience
to Christ’s own commands. “Temporal power” should be held as the poor
thing which it is, compared to Spiritual power,--for Spiritual power,
according to the Founder of the Christian Faith, is the transcendent
force of Love--love to God and love to man,--“that perfect love which
casteth out fear,” and which, being “born of God, cannot rest but in
God above all created things.”

Thus it follows--That if we hate or envy or slander any person, WE ARE
NOT CHRISTIANS.

If we prefer outward forms of religious ceremonial to the every-day
practice of a life lived as closely as possible in accordance with the
commands laid down for us in the Gospel, WE ARE NOT CHRISTIANS.

If we love ourselves more than our neighbours, WE ARE NOT CHRISTIANS.

If we care for money, position, and the ostentation attending these
things, more than truth, simplicity and plain dealing, WE ARE NOT
CHRISTIANS.

These ordinary tests of our daily conduct are quite enough to enable
us to decide whether we are or are not of the faith. If we are _not_,
we should cease to “sham” that we _are_. It will be far better for
all those with whom we are brought in contact. For, thank God, there
exist thousands of very real “Christians”--(“by their fruits ye shall
know them”), doing unostentatious good everywhere, rescuing the lost,
aiding the poor, comforting the sick, and helping the world to grow
happier and better. They may be _called_ Jews, or Baptists, Papists,
or Buddhists,--but I hold them all as “Christians” if they perform
those good deeds and live those good lives which are acceptable to
Christ,--while many church-going hypocrites called “Christians” whose
social existence is a scandal, whose dissipations, gross immoralities
and pernicious example of living are open dangers to the whole
community, do not deserve even such a complimentary term as “pagan”
applied to them. For the pagans--aye, the earliest savages, believed
in Something higher than themselves,--but these sort of people believe
in nothing but the necessity of getting what they want at all costs,
and are mere human cancers of evil, breeding infection and pestilence.
And it is particularly incumbent on the clergy of all denominations
at the present juncture to sift Themselves as to their calling and
election while sifting others,--to ask Themselves whether they may
not be in a great measure to blame for much of the infamy which reeks
from our great cities--for much of the apathy and indifference to
that bitter poverty, that neglected suffering which often gives birth
to Anarchy,--for much of the open atheism which shames the upper
classes of society. Let them live such lives as may liberate them
from all fear or hesitation in speaking out boldly to the souls they
have in charge--let them “preach the Gospel” as they were commanded,
rather than expound human dogmas. Sympathy, tenderness, patience, love
for all living creatures, rejection of everything that is mean and
cruel, false and cowardly,--a broad mind, open to all the beautiful
and gracious influences of Nature--a spirit uplifted in thanksgiving
to the loving God of all worlds, who is brought close to us and made
the friend of man in the Divine Personality of Christ,--this surely
is CHRISTIANITY,--a Faith which leaves no corner anywhere for the
admission of hate, dissension or despair. Such is the Faith the Master
taught, saying:

[3]“I have not spoken of myself, but of the Father which sent me; He
gave me a commandment what I should say, and what I should speak.

“And I know that His commandment is life everlasting--whatsoever I
speak, therefore, even as the Father taught me, so I speak.”

So He speaks--but do we listen? And if we listen,--and believe,--why do
we not obey?

FOOTNOTES:

[2] “Effects of the Factory System.”--Allen Clarke.

[3] John xii. 49.




UNCHRISTIAN CLERICS


It is generally supposed that an ordained minister of the Gospel is a
Christian. Whatever the faults, negligences and shortcomings of other
people in other conditions of life, it is tacitly expected that the
professing disciples of Christ, the priests, teachers and exponents of
holy and spiritual things, should be more or less holy and spiritual
in themselves. They are at any rate accredited with honest effort to
practise, as well as to preach, the divine ethics of their Divine
Master. Their position in the social community is one which, through
old-time tradition, historical sentiment, and inborn national piety, is
bound to command a certain respect from the laity. Any public disgrace
befalling a clergyman is always accompanied by a strong public sense of
shame, disappointment and regret. And when we meet (as most unhappily
we often do), with men in “holy orders” who,--instead of furnishing
the noble and pure examples of life and character which we have a
distinct right to look for in them,--degrade themselves and their high
profession by conduct unworthy of the lowest untutored barbarian, we
are moved by amazement as well as sorrow to think that such wolves in
sheep’s clothing should dare to masquerade as the sacredly ordained
helpers and instructors of the struggling human soul.

During the past few years there have been many examples of men
belonging to the hierarchy of the Church, who have wantonly and
knowingly outraged every canon of honour and virtue, and their sins
appear all the blacker because of the whiteness of the faith they
profess to serve. A criminal is twice a criminal when he adds hypocrisy
to his crime. The clergyman of a parish, who has all doors thrown open
to him,--who invites and receives the trust of his parishioners,--who
is set among them to guide, help and comfort them in the devious
and difficult ways of life, is a thousand times more to blame than
any other man in a less responsible position, when he knowingly and
deliberately consents to sin. Unless he is able to govern his own
passions, and eschew every base, mean and petty motive of action,
he is not fit to influence his fellow men, nor should he presume to
instruct them in matters which he makes it evident he does not himself
understand.

Quite recently a case was chronicled in the daily press of a clergyman
who went to visit a dying woman at her own request. She wished to make
a last confession to him, and so unburden her soul of its secret misery
before she passed away, trusting in God’s mercy for pardon and peace.
The clergyman went accordingly, and heard what she had to say. When the
unhappy creature was dead, however, he refused her poor body the sacred
rites of burial! Now it surely may be asked what authority had he or
any man calling himself a Christian minister to refuse the rites of
burial even to the worst of sinners? Whatever the woman’s faults might
have been, vengeance wreaked on a corpse is both futile and barbarous.
There is nothing in Christ’s pure and noble teaching that can endorse
so unholy a spirit of intolerance,--one too, which is calculated to
give the bitterest pain to the living friends and relations of the so
coarsely-insulted dead, and to breed in them a relentless hostility
to the Church and its representatives. For the poorest erring human
creature that ever turned over the pages of the New Testament, knows
that such conduct is not Christ-like, inasmuch as Christ had nothing
but the tenderest pity, pardon and peace for the worst sinner at the
last moment. When death steps in to close all accounts, it behoves man
to be more than merciful to his brother man. “For if ye forgive not men
their trespasses neither will your Father forgive you your trespasses.”

Still fresh in the minds of many must be the un-Christian conduct of
the late Cardinal Vaughan in denying the rites of Christian burial
to the venerable Dr. St. George Mivart. Dr. St. George Mivart was a
man of science whose theories did not agree with the tenets of the
Roman Catholic Church, and as he belonged ostensibly to that form of
faith, one may call him, if one so chooses, a bad Catholic. But when
it is remembered that within quite recent days, so-called “Christian”
priests in Servia have given their solemn benediction to the assassins
of the late King and Queen of that country, it is somewhat difficult
to understand or appreciate the kind of “religion” that blesses
murderers and regicides, yet refuses burial to a modern scientist who,
as far as his intellectual powers allowed him, was working for the
good and the wider instruction of the human race. At the time of the
“inhibition” and subsequent death of Dr. Mivart, I ventured to address
an “Open Letter” to Cardinal Vaughan on the subject. This Letter was
published in March 1900, and though no doubt the great “Prince of the
Church” never deigned to read it, a large majority of the public did,
and I have had much cause to rejoice that in the timorously silent
acquiescence of the Christian world in a deed which shames the very
name of Christ, I, at least, as one of the humblest among the followers
of the Christian faith, did have sufficient courage to speak out openly
against the wicked intolerance which made the Church itself seem mere
“sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal,” because lacking in that holy
charity “which suffereth long and is kind.” It was a barbarous act
to “inhibit” Dr. Mivart,--it was still more barbarous to refuse his
body the sacred burial-rites,--and though the great Cardinal has now
followed his victim to that world where all the secrets of the soul are
made manifest, his cruelty remains as a blot on his mortal career,--a
black smirch, ugly to look upon in the chronicle of his various virtues
and excellencies. No ordained minister of the Gospel has the right
to be intolerant. He has not the slightest excuse for arrogating to
himself any other code of ethics or conduct than that which is set out
plainly for him in the New Testament. Away from that he should not dare
to go, if he truly believes what he elects to preach,--and if he does
not believe, he should at once resign his office and not live on the
proceeds of what in his own private conscience he considers untrue.

Most of us have met with many a mean little curate,--many a sly,
spiteful, scandal-mongering hypocritical parson,--in the daily
round of our common lives and duties. Most of us know the “salad”
cleric,--the gentleman who is a doubtful compound of oil and vinegar,
with a good deal of tough green vegetable matter growing where
the brain should be,--coarse weed of bigotry, prejudice, and rank
obstinacy. None of us are entirely ignorant of the sedately amorous
parson who is either looking out for a wife on his own account, or
attempting a “Christianly” conversion of the wife of somebody else. In
country towns we can scarcely fail to have come across the domineering
vicar,--the small and petty tyrant, who whips the souls committed to
his charge with rods steeped in his own particular pickle of arrogance,
austerity and coercion, playing the part of a little despot over
terrorized Sunday-school children, and laying down the law for his
parishioners by way of a “new dispensation” wherein the Gospel has no
part. One such petty martinet, well known in a certain rural parish,
plays regular “ogre” to his choir boys. It is always a case of “Fee,
fi, fa, fo, fum, I smell the blood of a chorister,” with him. Should
one of these unfortunate minstrels chance to sneeze during service,
this vicar straightway imposes a penny fine (sometimes more) on the
unlucky little wretch for yielding to an irresistible nasal impulse!
This kind of thing is, of course, ridiculous, and would merit nothing
but laughter, were it not for the dislike, distrust and contempt
engendered in the minds of the boys by the display of such a peevish
spirit of trumpery oppression on the part of a man who is placed in
the position he holds to be an example of kindness, good temper,
cheerfulness and amiability to all. True, the vicar in question is
what may be called “liverish,” and a small boy’s sneeze may seem, to
a mind perverted by bilious bodily secretions, like the collapse of a
universe. But there are various ways of conquering even one’s physical
ills,--at least to the extent of sparing poor children the infliction
of fines because they have noses which occasionally give them trouble.

The begging cleric is of all sacerdotal figures the one most familiar
to the general community. One can seldom attend a church without
hearing the mendicant’s plea. If the collection taken were indeed for
the poor, and one felt that it was really and truly going to help
feed the starving and nourish the sick, how gladly most of us would
contribute, to the very best of our ability! But sad experience teaches
us that this is not so. There are “Funds” of other mettle than for
the sick and poor,--“restoration” funds especially. For many years a
famous church was in debt owing to “restorations,” and Sunday after
Sunday the vicar implored his congregation to lift “the burden” off its
time-honoured walls--in vain! At last one parishioner paid the amount
required in full. The vicar acknowledged the cheque,--put a recording
line in the “Parish Magazine,”--wrote a formal letter of thanks
regretting that the donor did not “show a good example by attending
public worship on Sundays,”--after which, _for more than a year he did
not speak to that parishioner again_! This is a fact. Neither he nor
his wife during that time ever showed the slightest common civility
to the one individual who, out of all the parish, had “lifted the
burden,” concerning which so many pious exordiums had been preached.
_Till_ the debt was paid, the vicar showed every friendliness to the
person in question--but afterwards--well!--one can only suppose it
was a case of “Othello’s occupation gone!” He could beg no more,--not
for that particular object. But I understand he has started fresh
“restorations” lately, so till he finds another trusting sheep in the
way of a too sympathetic parishioner, he will be quite happy.

There are some clerics who, to their sacred duties add “a little
literary work.” They are not literary men,--indeed very frequently
they have no idea whatever of literature--they are what may be called
“literary jobbers.” Many clergymen have been, and are still, greatly
distinguished in the literary calling--but I am not alluding to
past or future Kingsleys. The men I mean are those who “do a bit of
writing”--and help in compiling books of reference to which few ever
refer. They are apt to be the most pertinacious beggars of their
class,--beggars, not for others’ needs, but for their own. They want
introductions to “useful” people--people of “influence”--and they ask
for letters to publishers, which they sometimes get. The publishers
are not grateful. They are over-run, they say, with clergymen who want
to write guide-books, books of travel, books of reference, books of
reminiscence. One of these “reverend” individuals, pleading stress of
poverty, was employed by a lady to do some copying work, for which,
in a well-meant wish to satisfy the immediate needs of his wife and
children, she paid him in advance the sum of Fifty Pounds. He sent her
a signed receipt for the money with the following gushing epistle:


     “DEAR ----,

     Could I write as you do, I might find words to express in part
     some of my feelings of gratitude to you for all your kindness.
     My little daughter owes to you untold happiness, and I believe
     the goodness you ever show her will brighten her whole future
     life. My dear wife you help to bear her many burdens of health
     and loneliness as no other has ever attempted to do; and my
     very mediocre self owes to you, a recognition, after many long
     struggles, I will not say of merit, for no one knows better than
     myself, my own shortcomings, but of ‘effort.’ In fact, you come to
     us as Amenhotep sung of the sun:--


       Thou art very beautiful, brilliant and exalted above earth,
       Thy beams encompass all lands, which thou hast made.
       Thou art our sun.
       Thou bindest us with thy love.
       Thou art on high, but the day passes with thy going!


     Even so, your kindly heart has shone upon our life, and made us
     feel the springs of life within us. May the Great Master of all
     things for ever bless you and yours!”


After this poetical effusion,[4] it is difficult to believe that
this same “Christian” minister, in order to gratify the private
jealousy, spite and malice of a few common persons whom he fancied
might be useful to him on account of their “local” influence, wrote
and published a scurrilous lampoon on the very friend who had tried
to benefit him and his wife and family, and to whom he had expressed
himself in the above terms of unmeasured gratitude! But such,
nevertheless, was the case. Report says that he was handsomely paid
for his trouble, which may perhaps serve as his excuse,--for in many
cases, as we know, money outweighs principle, even with a disciple of
Christ. It did so in the case of Judas Iscariot, who, however, “went
out and hanged himself” promptly. Perhaps the “very mediocre” cleric
who owed to the woman he afterwards insulted, “a recognition after many
long struggles,” will do the same morally and socially in due course.
For it would be as great a wrong to the Church to call such a man a
“Christian” as it would be to canonize Judas. Even the untutored savage
will not injure one with whom he has broken bread. And to bite the hand
that has supplied a need, is scarcely the act of a mongrel cur,--let us
hope it is a sufficiently rare performance among mongrel clerics.

Among other such “trifling” instances of the _un_-Christianity of
Christian ministers may be quoted a recent instance of a letter
addressed to a country newspaper by a clergyman who complained of
the small fees allowed him for the burial of paupers! “The game,” so
he expressed it, “was not worth the candle.” Christian charity was
no part of the business. Unless one can make a margin of profit, by
committing paupers to the hope of a joyful resurrection, why do it
at all? Such appeared to be the sum and substance of the reverend
gentleman’s argument. Another case in point is the following: A poor
man of seventy-five years old, getting the impression that Death was
too long in coming to fetch him, committed suicide by hanging himself
in a coal-shed. His widow, nearly as aged as he was, went tottering
feebly along to the clergyman of the parish, to relate the disaster and
seek for help. The first thing the good minister told her was, that
her husband, by committing suicide, had gone to hell. He then relaxed
his sternness somewhat, and kindly said that, considering her age,
infirmity and trouble, she “might call at the rectory every afternoon
for the tea-leaves.” This gracious invitation meant that the bereaved
old creature could have, for her consolation, the refuse of the
afternoon tea-pot after it had been well drained by this “Christian”
gentleman, his wife and family! Of other help she got none, and life
having become too hard for her to manage alone, despite the assistance
of the clergyman’s tea-leaves, she very soon, fortunately for herself,
died of grief and starvation. “He that giveth to the poor” in this
fashion, truly “lendeth to the Lord.”

“Christianity” and “Christian” are beautiful words, emblematic of
beautiful thoughts and beautiful deeds. The men who profess to teach
the value of those thoughts, the influence of those deeds, should
be capable in themselves of practically illustrating what they mean
by their faith, in their own lives and actions. Inspired by the
purest Creed that was ever taught to mankind for its better hope and
enlightenment, they should express in their attitude to the world, a
confident and constant joy and belief in God’s goodness, and should
remember that if He, their divine Master “so loved us,” equally should
they, His ordained ministers, love us, ay, even the worst of us, in
their turn. When, on the contrary, they do things for which the poorest
peasant or dockyard labourer would have the right, and the honest
right too, to despise them,--when they commit base actions for money
or advancement,--when they are harsh, unyielding, discourteous and
obstinate to the degree of even declining to aid a good cause or assist
in some benefit to the nation at large, merely because _they_ have not
been consulted as to ways and methods, they do not deserve to be called
“Christian” at all. They are of that class, unhappily increasing in
number, who cry out: “Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in Thy name?”
to whom will be given the answer: “I never knew you; depart from Me,
ye that work iniquity!” Great and noble beyond all praise are true
“Christian” ministers,--and thousands of them are to be found in all
parts of the world, working silently and bravely for the rescue of
bodies as well as souls, giving practical as well as spiritual help and
sympathy to their fellow-men in trouble. But just because their labours
are so valuable, one resents all the more deeply the conduct of certain
members of the clergy who cast dishonour upon their whole calling,--and
just because the vocation of “priest” is so high, we intensely deplore
every action that tends to debase it. The un-Christian cleric belongs
to no spiritual form of faith whatsoever, and should not be allowed
to pretend that he does. He has but one religion,--Self. And from the
professor of Self, no man need ask either help or instruction.

FOOTNOTE:

[4] As some doubt has been expressed as to whether this incident is a
true one, the author wishes it to be known that she holds the original
letter written and signed by the reverend lampooner in question.




THE SOCIAL BLIGHT


People who live in the country know what is meant by a “blight”--a
thing which is neither mist nor storm, neither cloud nor rain,--a
fever of the atmosphere, without any freshening or cleansing force
in its composition. Like a dull stretch of smoky fog, it hangs for
hours and often for days over the face of the landscape, poisoning
the wholesome fruit and grain in the orchards and fields, and leaving
trails of noxious insect pests behind it upon trees and flowers,
withering their foliage, and blackening all buds of promise with a
destroying canker to their very core. It is a suffocating, malodorous
miasma, clinging to the air, for which there is no remedy but a
strong, ay, even a tempestuous wind,--a wind which vigorously pierces
through the humid vapour and disperses it, tearing it to shreds, and
finally working up such a storm as shall drown it out of existence in
torrents of purifying rain. Then all nature is relieved,--the air is
cleared,--health and gladness re-assert their beneficent influences,
and the land lies open to renewed life and easy breathing once more.

Even as “blight” is known in things natural, so is it known and easily
recognizable in things moral and social. It occurs periodically and
with more or less regularity, between certain changing, and not always
progressive phases or epochs of human civilization. It visited Sodom
and Gomorrah, Tyre and Sidon; it loomed over Nineveh and Babylon,--and
in our day it is steadily spreading its pall over Europe and America.
Its gloom is heavy and pronounced,--it would seem to be darkening
into the true sable or death colour, for there is no light of faith
to illumine it. It is the outcome of the infected breath of peoples
who are deliberately setting God aside out of their countings, and
living for Self and the Hour alone. So-called “scientists,” scraping
at the crust-covering of the mine of knowledge, and learning of its
hidden treasure about as much as might be measured with a finger-nail,
have boldly asserted that there is no God, no Supreme Intelligent
Force back of the universe,--no future life,--nothing but death and
destruction for the aspiring, fighting, working human soul,--and that,
therefore, having been created out of caprice, a “sport” of chance
and the elements, and having nothing to exist for but to make chance
and the elements as agreeable as possible during his brief conscious
experience of them, the best thing for man to do is to “eat, drink,
and be merry all the days of his life,” though even this, according to
Solomon, is “also vanity.” For of eating comes indigestion, of drink
stupefaction, and of merriment satiety. Strange it is that if there
is no higher destiny for man than this world and its uses, he should
always be thrown back upon himself dissatisfied! Give him millions of
money, and when he has them, he cares little for what they can bring;
grant him unlimited power and a few years suffice to weary him of its
use. And stranger still it is to realize, that while those who do not
admit God’s existence, strut forth like bantams on a dunghill, crowing
their little opinions about the sun-rise, we are all held fast and
guided, not only in our physical, but in our moral lives by immutable
laws, invisible in their working, but sooner or later made openly
manifest. Crime meets with punishment as surely as night follows day.
If the retribution is not of man’s making,--if human law, often so
vicious and one-sided in itself, fails to give justice to the innocent,
then Something or Someone steps in to supply man’s lack of truth and
courage, and executes a judgment from which there is no appeal. What
it is or Who it is, we may not presume to declare,--the Romans called
it Jove or Jupiter;--we call it God, while denying, with precisely the
same easy flippancy as the Romans did just before their downfall, that
such a Force exists. It is convenient and satisfying to Mammonites
and sensualists generally, to believe in nothing but themselves, and
the present day. It would be very unpleasant for them to have to
contemplate with any certainty a future life where neither Money nor
Sex prevail. And because it would be unpleasant, they naturally do not
admit its possibility. Nevertheless, without belief in the Creator and
Ruler of all things,--without faith in the higher spiritual destiny of
man as an immortal and individual soul, capable of progressing ever
onwards to wider and grander spheres of action, life in this world
appears but a poor and farcical futility.

Yet it is precisely the poor, farcical and futile view of life that
is taken by thousands of European and American people in our present
period. Both press and pulpit reflect it; it is openly shown in the
decadence of the drama, of art, of literature, of politics, and of
social conduct. The “blight” is over all. The blight of atheism,
infidelity, callousness and indifference to honourable principle,--the
blight of moral cowardice, self-indulgence, vanity and want of heart.
Without mincing matters, it can be fairly stated that the aristocratic
Jezebel is the fashionable woman of the hour, while the men vie with
one another as to who shall best screen her from her amours with
themselves. And so far as the sterner sex are personally concerned,
the moneyed man is the one most sought after, most tolerated, most
appreciated and flattered in that swarm of drones called “society”
where each buzzing insect tries to sting the other, or crawl over it
in such wise as to be the first to steal whatever honey may be within
reach. And worst of all things is the selfish apathy which pervades
the majority of the well-to-do classes. As little sympathy is shown
among them for the living, as regret for the dead. The misfortunes of
friends are far more often made subject for ill-natured mockery than
for compassion,--the deaths of parents and relations are accepted
with a kind of dull pleasure, as making way for the inheritance of
money or estates. No real delight is shown in the arts which foster
peace, progress and wisdom; and equally little enthusiasm is stirred
for such considerations of diplomacy or government which help to
keep nations secure. A great man dies one day, and is forgotten the
next,--unless some clumsy and scandalous “biography” which rakes up
all his faults and mistakes in life, and publishes private letters of
the most intimate and sacred character, can be hawked to the front
by certain literary vultures who get their living by tearing out the
heart of a corpse. Say that a dire tragedy is enacted,--such as the
assassination of the Empress Elizabeth of Austria, or the atrocious
murder of the late King and Queen of Servia,--or, what is to many minds
almost as bad,--the heartless and un-Christian conduct of Leopold,
King of the Belgians, to his unhappy daughter Stéphanie,--and though
each event may be as painful and terrible as any that ever occupied
the attention of the historian, they appear to excite no more human
emotion than a few cold expressions of civil surprise or indifference.
Feeling,--warm, honest, active, passionate feeling for any cause, is
more difficult to rouse than the Sloth from its slumbers. It would,
in truth, seem to be dead. The Church cannot move it. The Drama fails
to stir it. Patriotism,--National Honour,--have no power to lift it
from the quagmire of inertia. But let there be a sudden panic on the
Stock Exchange,--let the Paris Bourse be shaken,--let Wall Street be
ablaze with sinister rumour--and then hey and halloo for a reckless,
degrading, humiliating, miserable human stampede! Like infuriated
maniacs men shriek and stamp and wrestle;--with brains on fire,
they forget that they were born to be reasoning creatures capable
of self-control;--their much boasted-of “education” avails them
nothing,--and they offer to the gods a spectacle of frantic fear and
ignominy of which even an untaught savage might well be ashamed.

But perhaps the most noxious sign of the blight in the social
atmosphere is the openly increasing laxity of morals, and the frankly
disgraceful disregard of the marriage tie. Herein the British
aristocracy take the lead as the choicest examples of the age. Whatever
Europe or America may show in the way of godless and dissolute living,
we are unhappily forced to realize that there are men in Great Britain,
renowned for their historic names and exclusive positions, who are
content to stand by, the tame witnesses of their own marital dishonour,
accepting, with a cowardice too contemptible for horsewhipping,
other men’s children as their own, all the time knowing them to be
bastards. We have heard of a certain “nobleman” who,--to quote Holy
Writ,--“neighed after” another man’s wife to such an extent, that to
stop the noise, the obliging husband accepted £60,000, a trifling sum,
which was duly handed over. Whether the gentleman who neighed, or the
gentleman who paid, was the worst rascal, must be left to others to
determine. It was all hushed up quite nicely,--and both parties are
received “in the best society,” with even more attention than would be
shown to them if they were clean and honest, instead of being soiled
and disreputable. The portrait of the lady whose damaged virtue was
plastered up for £60,000 is often seen in pictorials, with appended
letterpress suitably describing her as a lily-white dove of sweet
purity and peace. One blames the sinners in this sordid comedy less
than the “fashionable” folk who tolerate and excuse their conduct.
Sinners there are, and sinners there always will be,--modern Davids
will always exist who seek after Bathsheba, and do their level best to
get Uriah the Hittite comfortably out of the way,--but that they should
be encouraged in their sins and commended for them, is quite another
story. Apart from the pernicious influence they exercise on their own
particular “set,” the example of conduct they give to the nation at
large, not only arouses national contempt, but in some cases, where
certain notable politicians are concerned, may breed national disaster.

With looseness of morals naturally comes looseness of conversation.
The conversation of many of the Upper Ten, in England at least, shows
a remarkable tendency towards repulsive subjects and objectionable
details. It is becoming quite a common thing to hear men and women
talking about their “Little Marys,” a phrase which, though invented
by Mr. J. M. Barrie, is not without considerable vulgarity and
offence. Before the brilliant Scottish novelist chose this title
for a play dealing with the digestive apparatus, it would have done
him no harm to pause and reflect that with a very large portion of
the Christian world, namely the Roman Catholic, the name of Mary is
held to be the most sacred of all names, second to none save that of
the Divine Founder of the Faith. I am told on good authority that
Americans,--especially the best of the American women,--have been
amazed and more or less scandalized at the idea that any portion of the
“cultured” British public should be found willing to attend a dramatic
representation dealing with matters pertaining to the human stomach.
I hope this report is true. My admiration for some American women is
considerable, but it would go up several points higher if I were made
quite sure that their objection to this form of theatrical enterprise
was genuine, permanent, and unconquerable. I like Mr. Barrie very much,
and his Scottish stories delight me as they delight everybody, but I
want him to draw the line at the unbeautiful details of dyspepsia.
People are already too fond of talking about the various diseases
afflicting various parts of their bodies to need any spur in that way
from the romantic drama. One of the most notorious women of the day has
attained her doubtful celebrity partially by conversing about her own
inner mechanism and other people’s inner mechanisms in a style which
is not only “free,” but frankly disgusting. But,--“she is so amusing!”
say the Smart Set,--“One cannot repeat her stories, of course--they go
_rather_ far!--but--but--you really ought to hear her tell them!” This
kind of thing is on a par with certain lewd fiction lately advertised
by certain enterprising publishers who announce--“You must have this
book! The booksellers will not show it on their bookstalls. They say
you ought NOT to read it. GET IT!”

All homage to the booksellers who draw the line at printed garbage! One
must needs admire and respect them for refusing to take percentages
on the sale of corrupt matter. For business is always business,--and
when business men see that the tendency of a certain portion of the
reading public is towards prurient literature, they might, were they
less honourable and conscientious than they are, avail themselves
financially of this morbid and depraved taste. Especially as there are
a large number of self-called “stylists” who can always be relied
upon to praise the indecent in literature. They call it “strong,” or
“virile,” and reck nothing of the fact that the “strong” stench of it
may poison previously healthy minds, and corrupt otherwise innocent
souls. Prurient literature is always a never-failing accompaniment
of social “blight.” The fancy for it arises when wholesome literary
fare has become too simple for the diseased and capricious mental
appetite, and when the ideal conceptions of great imaginative minds,
such as the romances of Scott and Dickens, are voted “too long and
boresome!--there’s really no time to read such stories nowadays!”
No,--there is no time! There’s plenty of time to play Bridge though!

Poetry--the greatest of the arts--is neglected at the present day,
because nobody will read it. Among the most highly “educated” persons,
many can be met with who prattle glibly about Shakespeare, but who
neither know the names of his plays nor have read a line of his work.
With the decline of Poesy comes as a matter of course the decline of
Sculpture, Painting, Architecture and Music. For Poesy is the parent
stem from which all these arts have sprung. The proofs of their decline
are visible enough amongst us to-day. Neither Great Britain, nor
Europe, nor America, can show a really great Poet. England’s last great
poet was Tennyson,--since his death we have had no other. Similarly
there is no great sculptor, no great painter, no great novelist,
no great architect, no great musician. I use the word “great,” of
course, in its largest sense, in the sense wherein we speak of Michael
Angelo, Raffaelle, or Beethoven. There are plenty of clever “sketchy”
artists,--“impressionist” painters and fictionists, “rococo” sculptors,
and melodious drawing-room song-writers,--but we wait in vain for a new
“grand” opera, a nobly-inspired statue, a novel like “Guy Mannering,”
or a Cathedral, such as the devout old monks designed in the intervals
between prayer and praise. The beautiful and poetic ideals that made
such work possible are, if not quite dead, slowly dying, under the
influence of the “blight” which infects the social atmosphere,--the
blight which is thick with Self and Sensuality,--which looms between
man and his Maker, shutting out every hopeful glimpse of the sun of
faith, whose life-giving rays invigorate the soul. And those who see
it slowly darkening--those who have been and are students of history,
and are thereby able to recognize its appearance, its meaning, and its
mission, and who know the mischief wrought by the poison it exhales,
will pray for a Storm!


     “Come but the direst storm and stress that Fate
     Can bring upon us in its darkest hour,
     Then will the realm awake, however late,
     From the warm sloth in which we yawn and cower,
     And pass our sordid lives in greed, or mate
     With animal delights in luxury’s bower;
     Then will the ancient virtues bloom anew,
     And love of country quench the love of gold;
     Then will the mocking spirits that imbue
     Our daily converse fade like misty cold
     When the clear sunshine permeates the blue;
     Men will be manly as in days of old,
     And scorn the base delights that sink them down
     Into the languid waters where they drown!”




THE DEATH OF HOSPITALITY


There is an old song, a very old song, the refrain of which runs
thus: “’Twas merry in the hall, when the beards wagged all, We shall
never see the like again, again!--We shall never see the like again!”
Whether there was anything particularly hilarious in the wagging of
beards we may not feel able to determine, but there is unquestionably
a vague sense of something festive and social conveyed in the quaint
lines. We feel, without knowing why, that it was, it _must_ have
been, “merry in the hall,” at the distant period alluded to,--while
at the present time we are daily and hourly made painfully aware
that whether it be in hall, drawing-room or extensive “reception
gallery,” the merriment formerly so well sung and spoken of exists
no longer. The Harp that once through Tara’s Halls--no!--I mean the
Beards that once wagged in the Hall, wag no more. Honest laughter has
given place to the nanny-goat sniggering bleat now common to polite
society, and understood to be the elegantly trained and “cultured”
expression of mirth. The warm hand-shake has, in a very great measure,
degenerated into the timorous offer of two or three clammy fingers
extended dubiously, as with a fear of microbes. And Hospitality,
large-hearted, smiling, gracious Hospitality, is dead and wrapped in
its grave-clothes, waiting in stiff corpse-like state for its final
burial. Public dinners, public functions of all kinds,--in England at
any rate,--are merely so many funeral feasts in memory of the great
defunct virtue. Its spirit has fled,--and there is no calling it
back again. The art of entertaining is lost,--together with the art
of conversation. And when our so-called “friends” are “at home,” we
are often more anxious to find reasons for declining rather than for
accepting their invitations, simply because we know that there is no
real “at home” in it, but merely an “out-of-home” arrangement, in which
a mixed crowd of people are asked to stand and swelter in an uneasy
crush on staircases and in drawing-rooms, pretending to listen to music
which they can scarcely hear, and scrambling for tea which is generally
too badly made to drink. Indeed, it may be doubted whether, of all
the various ludicrous social observances in which our progressive
day takes part, there is anything quite so sublimely idiotic as a
smart “At Home” in London during the height of the season. Nothing
certainly presents men and women in such a singularly unintelligent
aspect. Their faces all wear more or less the same expression of forced
amiability,--the same civil grin distorts their poor mouths--the same
wondering and weary stare afflicts their tired straining eyeballs--and
the same automatic arm-movement and hand-jerk works every unit, as
each approaches the hostess in the conventional manner enjoined by the
usages of that “cultured” hypocrisy which covers a multitude of lies.
Sheep, herding in a field and cropping the herbage in the comfortable
unconsciousness that they are eating merely to be eaten, are often
stated to be the silliest of animals,--but whether they are sillier
than the human beings who consent to be squashed together in stuffy
rooms where they can scarcely move, under the sham impression that they
are “at home” with a friend, is a matter open to question. Of course
to some minds it may be, and no doubt is, extremely edifying to learn
by the society papers that Mrs. So-and-So, or Lord and Lady Thingummy
will “entertain a great deal this season.” People who have no idea
what this kind of “entertaining” means, may have glittering visions
thereof. They may picture to themselves scenes of brilliancy where “a
thousand hearts beat happily, and when, Music arose with its voluptuous
swell, Soft eyes looked love to eyes which spake again, And all went
merry as a marriage-bell!” Only these things do not happen. Anything
but love is “looked” from soft eyes and hard eyes equally;--derision,
contempt, indifference, dejection, malice, and (so far as champagne,
ices and general messy feeding are concerned) greed, light up these
“windows of the soul” from time to time during the progress of such
festivities; but love, never! The women are far too busy finding
standing-room wherein to show themselves and their newest frocks off
to advantage, to waste any moment in mere sentiment, and it is a
Christianly beautiful sight to see how the dear things who wear the
dressmaker’s latest “creations” elbow and push and hustle and tread on
the toes of their sisters who are less highly favoured than themselves
in the matter of mere clothes. As for the men,--if they have, by
dint of hard exertion, managed to get in at the “crush,” and near
enough to the hostess to bow and touch her hand, their sole attention
henceforward becomes concentrated on the business of getting out again
as rapidly as possible. For let it be said to the praise, honour and
glory of the sterner sex, that taken in the rough majority, they detest
the fashionable “At Home,” with vigorous and honest intensity,--and
unless they are of that degenerate class who like to be seen hanging
round some notoriously press-puffed “professional beauty,” or some
equally notoriously known leader of the Smart Set, they are seldom
seen at such gatherings. They feel themselves to be incongruous and
out of place,--and so they are. “At Homes” are curious sort of social
poultry-yards, where the hens have it all their own way, and do most
distinctly crow.

But if “At Homes” are bad enough, the smart, the very smart
dinner-party is perhaps a little worse in its entire lack of the true
hospitality which, united to grace and tact and ready conversation,
should make every guest feel that his or her presence is valuable
and welcome. A small private dinner, at which the company are some
six or eight persons at most, is sometimes (though not by any means
always) quite a pleasant affair, but a “big” dinner in the “big” sense
of the word, is generally the most painful and dismal of functions,
except to those for whom silent gorging and after repletion are the
essence of all mental and physical joy. I remember--and of a truth
it would be impossible to forget--one of these dinners which took
place one season in a very “swagger” house--the house of a member of
that old British nobility whose ancestors and titles always excite a
gentle flow of saliva in the mouths of snobs. The tables--there were
two,--were, to use the formal phrase, “laid for forty covers”--that
is to say that each table accommodated twenty guests. The loveliest
flowers, the most priceless silver, the daintiest glass, adorned
the festive boards,--everything that taste could suggest or wealth
supply, had its share in the general effect of design and colour,--the
host was at the head of one table,--the hostess at the other--and
between-whiles a fine string band discoursed the sweetest music. But
with it all there was no real hospitality. We might as well have been
seated at some extra-luxurious table-d’hôte in one of the “Kur” houses
of Austria or Germany, paying so much per day for our entertainment.
Any touch of warm and kindly feeling was altogether lacking; and to
make matters worse, a heavy demon brooded over the brave outward show
of the feast,--a demon with sodden grey wings that refused to rise
and soar,--the demon of a hopeless, irremediable Stupidity! Out and
alas!--here was the core of the mischief! For sad as it is to lack
Heart in the entertaining of our friends, it doubles the calamity to
lack Brain as well! Our host was stupid;--dull to a degree unimaginable
by those who do not know what some lordly British aristocrats can be at
their own tables,--our hostess, a beautiful woman, was equally stupid,
being entirely engrossed in herself and her own bodily charms, to the
utter oblivion of the ease and well-being of her guests. What a meal
it was! How interminably it dragged its slow length along! What small
hydraulic bursts of meaningless talk spurted out between the entrées
and the game!--talk to be either checked by waiters proffering more
food, or drowned in the musical growling of the band! I believe one
man hazarded a joke,--but it was not heard,--and I know that a witty
old Irish peer told an anecdote which was promptly “quashed” by a dish
of asparagus being thrust before him, just as he was, in the richest
brogue, arriving at the “point.” But as nobody listened to him, it
did not matter. Nobody does listen to anybody or anything nowadays at
social functions. Everybody talks with insane, babbling eagerness,
apparently indifferent as to whether they are heard or not. Any amount
of people ask questions and never think of waiting for the answers.
Should any matters, small or great, require explanation, scarce a
soul has the patience or courtesy to attend to such explanation or to
follow it with any lucidity or comprehension. It is all hurry-skurry,
helter-skelter, and bad, shockingly bad, manners.

I am given to understand that Americans, and Americans alone, retain
and cherish the old-fashioned grace of Hospitality, which is so rapidly
becoming extinct in Great Britain. I would fain believe this, but of
myself I do not know. I have had no experience of social America,
save such as has been freely and cordially taught me by Americans
in London. Some of these have indeed proved that they possess the
art of entertaining friends with real friendly delight in the grace
and charm and mutual help of social intercourse,--others again, by
an inordinate display of wealth, and a feverish yearning for the
Paragraph-Man (or Woman), have plainly shown that Hospitality is,
with them, a far less concern than Notoriety. However this may be,
no sane person will allow that it is “hospitality” to ask a number of
friends into your house and there keep them all standing because you
have managed that there shall be no room to sit down, while strong,
half-cold tea and stale confectionery are hastily dispensed among them.
It is not “hospitality” to ask people to dinner, and never speak a
word to them all the evening, because you, if a man, are engaged upon
your own little “business affair,” or, if a woman, are anxious not
to lose hold of your special male flatterer. If friends are invited,
they should surely be welcomed in the manner friendly, and made to
feel at home by the personal attention of both host and hostess. It
is not “hospitality” to turn them loose in bewildered droves through
grounds or gardens, to listen to a band which they have no doubt heard
many times before,--or to pack them all into a stuffy room to be
“entertained” by a professional musician whom they could hear to much
more comfortable and independent advantage by paying for stalls at the
legitimate concert hall. What do we really mean by Hospitality? Surely
we mean friendship, kindness, personal interest, and warm-hearted
openness of look and conduct,--and all of these are deplorably missing
from the “smart” functions of up-to-date society in London, whatever
the state of things may be concerning this antique virtue in New York
and Boston. It would appear that the chief ingredients of Hospitality
are manners,--for as Emerson says: “Manners are the _happy way_ of
doing things.” This “happy way” is becoming very rare. Society,
particularly the “Upper Ten” society,--is becoming, quite noticeably,
very rude. Some of the so-called “smartest” women are notoriously
very vulgar. Honesty, simplicity, sympathy, and delicacy of feeling
are, or seem to be, as much out of date as the dainty poems of Robert
Herrick, and the love-sonnets of Sir Philip Sidney. Time goes on, say
the iconoclasts--and we must go with it--we must, if our hurrying
civilization requires it, pass friends by with a cool nod, mock at
the vices of the young, and sneer at the failings of the old;--we
are all too busy to be courteous,--too much in a hurry grabbing gold
to be kind, and much too occupied with ourselves to be thoughtful of
others. So let us bury Hospitality decently once and for all, and
talk no more about it! It was a grand old Virtue!--let us inter it
with honour,--and cease to hold our funeral feasts and entertainments
in its name. For, being dead, ’tis dead and done with,--and amid all
our twentieth-century shams, let us at least drop, for shame, our
base imitations of the great-souled splendid Grace that was meant to
link our lives more sweetly together, to engender love, and to make
home more home-like. For nowadays, few of us are simple and truthful
enough in our lines of conduct even to understand Hospitality in
its real meaning. “Between simple and noble persons,”--says a great
philosopher--“there is always a quick intelligence; they recognize
at sight; and meet on a better ground than the talents and skills
they may chance to possess, namely, on sincerity and uprightness.”
Sincerity and uprightness are the very fibre and life-blood of true
Hospitality. But the chief canon of modern society is hypocrisy, to
begin with. Insincerity and lack of principle naturally follow, with
their usual accompaniment, moral cowardice,--and so men and women sneak
and crawl, and flatter base persons for what they can get, and reject
all chances of faithful friendship for mere ephemeral show. Under such
conditions as these, what can good old Hospitality do but draw its
last breath with a gentle sigh of expiring sorrow for the mistaken
world which prefers a lie to a truth, and still to this day crucifies
all its loving would-be redeemers on miserable Calvarys of desolation!
No happiness does it gain thereby, but only increased bitterness and
weariness,--and the fact that all our social customs have greatly
changed since the old time when households were wisely ruled and very
simply ordered, is no advantage to the general social community. We
may, if we choose,--(and we very often do so choose,) fly from one
desire to another and thence to satiety, and back again from satiety to
desire, but we shall never, in such pursuit, find the peace engendered
by simplicity of life, or the love and lasting joy inspired by that
honourable confidence in one another’s best and noblest attributes,
which should frankly and openly set the seal on friendship, and make
Hospitality a glad duty as well as a delight. “Old-fashioned” as it may
be, no new fashion can ever replace it.




THE VULGARITY OF WEALTH


There are certain periods in the lives of nations when the balance of
things in general would seem to be faultily adjusted; when one side
of the scale almost breaks and falls to the ground through excess of
weight, and the other tips crazily upward, well-nigh to overturning,
through an equally undue excess of lightness. The inequality can be
traced with mathematical precision as occurring at regular intervals
throughout the world’s history. It is as though the clock of human
affairs had been set correctly for a certain limited time only, and
was then foredoomed to fall out of gear in such a manner as to need
cleansing and winding up afresh. A good many people, including some of
the wisest of our few wise men, have openly expressed the opinion that
we, of the proudest and greatest Empire at present under the sun, have
almost reached that particularly fatal figure on the Eternal Dial,


     When all the wheels run down,


and when the scales of Justice are becoming so dangerously worn
out and uneven, as to suggest an incapacity for holding social and
political weights and measures much longer. One of the symptoms of this
overstrained condition of our latter-day civilization is precisely
the same danger-signal which has in all ages accompanied national
disaster--a pernicious influence, like that of the planet “Algol,”
which, when in the ascendant, is said to betoken mischief and ruin
to all who see it rise on the horizon. Our evil Star, the evil star
of all Empires, has long ago soared above the eastern edge; fully
declared, it floods our heaven with such lurid brilliancy that we
can scarce perceive any other luminary. And its name is Mammon. The
present era in which we are permitted by Divine law to run through
our brief existence and make our mark or miss it, as we choose, is
principally distinguished by an insane worship of Wealth. Wealth in
excess--wealth in chunks--wealth in great awkward, unbecoming dabs,
is plastered, as it were, by the merest hap-hazard toss of fortune’s
dice, on the backs of uncultured and illiterate persons, who, bowed
down like asses beneath the golden burden, are asininely ignorant
of its highest uses. The making of millions would seem to be like a
malignant fever, which must run its course, ending in either the death
or the mental and physical wreck of the patient. He who has much money
seems always to find it insufficient, and straightway proceeds to make
more; while he who has not only much, but superabundance of the dross,
scatters it in every direction broadcast, wherever it can best serve
as an aid to his own self-advertisement, vanity and ostentation. Once
upon a time wealth could not purchase an entrance into society; now
it is the only pass-key. Men of high repute for learning, bravery,
and distinctive merit, are “shunted” as it were off the line to make
way for the motor-car traffic of plutocrats, who, by dint of “push,”
effrontery, and brazen impudence, manage to shout their income figures
persistently in the ears of those whose high privilege it is to
“give the lead” in social affairs. And to the shame of such exalted
individuals be it said, that they listen, with ears stretched wide,
to the yell of the huckster in stocks and shares; and setting aside
every thought for the future of Great Britain and the highest honour
of her sons and daughters, they sell their good word, their influence,
and their favour easily, for so much cash down. Men and women who have
the privilege of personally knowing, and frequently associating with
the Royal Family, are known to accept payment for bringing such and
such otherwise obscure persons under the immediate notice of the King;
and it is a most unfortunate and regrettable fact that throughout the
realm the word goes that no such obscure persons ever dine with their
Sovereign without having paid the “middle man” for the privilege. It
would be an easy matter for the present writer to name at least a
dozen well-known society women, assuming to be “loyal,” who make a
very good thing out of their “loyalty” by accepting huge payments in
exchange for their recommendation or introduction to Royal personages,
and who add considerably to their incomes by such means, bringing
the names of the King and Queen down to their own sordid level of
bargain and sale, with a reckless disregard of the damaging results
of such contemptible conduct. These are some of the very ladies who
are most frequently favoured by notice at Court, and who occupy the
position of being in the “swagger set.” Whereas, the men and women
who are faithful, who hold the honour of their King dearer than their
own lives, who refuse to truckle to the spirit of money-worship, and
who presume to denounce the sickening hypocrisy of modern society
life and its shameless prostitution of high ideals, are “hounded” by
those portions of the Press which are governed by Jew syndicates, and
slandered by every dirty cad that makes his cheap living by putting his
hand secretly in his neighbour’s pocket. Never, in all the ages of the
world, have truth-tellers been welcome; from Socrates to Christ the
same persecution has followed every human being who has had enough of
God in him or her to denounce shams; and the Christian religion itself
is founded on the crucifixion of Honesty by the priests of Hypocrisy.
It is a lesson that can hardly be too deeply dwelt upon at the present
notable time of day, which seems, for many students of national
affairs, the crucial point of a coming complete change in British
history.

On every side, look where we may, we see an almost brutal dominance
of wealth. We see the Yankee Trade-octopus, stretching out greedy
tentacles in every direction, striving to grasp British shipping,
British industries, and British interests everywhere, in that devouring
and deadly grip, which, if permitted to hold, would mean mischief and
loss of prestige to our country, though, no doubt, it might create
rejoicing in America. For America is by no means so fond of us as
certain interested parties would have us suppose. She would dearly like
to “patronise” us, but she does not love us, though at present she
hides her hand. In a case of struggle, she would not support the “old
country” for mere sentimental love of it. She would naturally serve
only her own best interests. As a nation of bombast and swagger, she
is a kind of “raree-show” in the world’s progress; but her strength
is chiefly centred in dollars, and her influence on the social world
teaches that “dollars are the only wear.” English society has been
sadly vulgarized by this American taint. Nevertheless, it is, as it
has always been, a fatal mistake for any nation to rely on the extent
of its cash power alone. Without the real spirit which makes for
greatness--without truth, without honour, without sincere patriotism
and regard for the real well-being and honest government of the
majority--any national system, whether monarchical or republican, must
inevitably decay and perish from the face of the earth.

Unblemished honesty is the best policy for statesmen; but that such has
been their rule of conduct in these latter years may perhaps be open to
question. The late Mr. W. E. H. Lecky, whose broad-minded, impartial
views of life, commend themselves forcibly to every literary student,
writing of Cecil Rhodes, whose funeral service was celebrated with such
almost royal pomp in St. Paul’s Cathedral, gives us a sketch which
should make the most casual “man in the street” pause and reflect as to
whether those solemn public rites and tributary honours from both the
King and Queen were not somewhat out of place on such an occasion.

“What Mr. Rhodes did,” wrote Mr. Lecky, in his strong, trenchant
way, “has been very clearly established. When holding the highly
confidential position of Prime Minister of the Cape Colony, and being
at the same time a Privy Councillor of the Queen, he engaged in a
conspiracy for the overthrow of the Government of a neighbouring
and friendly State. In order to carry out this design, he deceived
the High Commissioner whose Prime Minister he was. He deceived his
own colleagues in the Ministry. He collected under false pretences
a force which was intended to co-operate with an insurrection in
Johannesburg. Being a Director of the Chartered Company, he made use
of that position without the knowledge of his colleagues to further
the conspiracy. He took an active and secret part in smuggling great
quantities of arms into the Transvaal, which were intended to be used
in the rebellion; and at a time when his organs in the Press were
representing Johannesburg as seething with spontaneous indignation
against an oppressive Government, he, with another millionaire, was
secretly expending many thousands of pounds in that town in stimulating
and subsidizing the rising. He was also directly connected with the
shabbiest incident in the whole affair, the concoction of a letter
from the Johannesburg conspirators absurdly representing English women
and children at Johannesburg as in danger of being shot down by the
Boers, and urging the British to come at once and save them. It was a
letter drawn up with the sanction of Mr. Rhodes many weeks before the
raid, and before any disturbance had arisen; and kept in reserve to
be dated and used in the last moment for the purpose of inducing the
young soldiers in South Africa to join in the raid, and of subsequently
justifying their conduct before the War Office, and also for the
purpose of being published in the English Press at the same time as
the first news of the raid in order to work upon English opinion, and
persuade the English people that the raid, though technically wrong was
morally justifiable.... No reasonable judge can question that in these
transactions he was more blamable than those who were actually punished
by the law for taking part in the raid, far more blamable than those
young officers who were, in truth, the most severely punished and who
had been induced to take part in it under false representation of the
wishes of the Government at home, and a grossly false representation
of the state of things at Johannesburg. The failure of the raid, and
his undoubted complicity with its design, obliged Mr. Rhodes to resign
the post of Prime Minister, and his directorship of the Chartered
Company.... But what can be thought of the language of a Minister who
volunteered to assure the House of Commons that in all the transactions
I have described, Mr. Rhodes, though he had made ‘a gigantic mistake,’
a mistake perhaps as great as a statesman could make, had done nothing
affecting his personal honour?”

What has been thought, and what _is_ thought of the matter, has been
largely suppressed by party politicians. The War Enquiry was conducted
with secrecy; Cabinet Ministers held their Councils, as it were, with
locked doors. An eager desire to conceal the real state of affairs in
the country, and an unfortunate tendency to “hush up” such matters
as are the plain right of ratepayers to know, are the betraying signs
of many of our statesmen’s inward disquiet. Because, as many people
instinctively feel, the trail of finance is likely to be openly traced
to an unlawful, and in some cases, dishonourable extent, over much
recent political work. Honour, however, is due to those Ministers who
valiantly endeavour to screen greater names than their own behind their
skilful diplomacy; and one naturally admires the zeal and courage with
which they fight for this cause, even as M. Maurepas and M. Necker
fought a similar campaign long ago in the dark days of France, when,
as Carlyle writes, it was “clearly a difficult point for Government,
that of the dealing with the masses--if indeed it be not rather the
sole point and problem of Government, and all other points were
incidental crotchets, superficialities, and beatings of the wind! For
let Charter-chests, Use and Wont, Law, common and special, say what
they will, the masses count to so many millions of units, made to all
appearance by God, whose earth this is declared to be. Besides, the
people are not without ferocity; they have sinews and indignation.”

At the immediate moment, the masses in our country are, rightly or
wrongly, vaguely conscious of two things which they view as forms
of injustice, namely, that they are asked to pay rates for an
educational system which a large bulk of them do not approve, and that
they are taxed for the expenses of a war, the conduct of which was
discussed “secretly,” as though its methods implied some dishonour
to those concerned in it. Moreover, they understand, with more or
less bewilderment, that though the King is now “Supreme Lord of the
Transvaal” there is no chance whatever for British subjects to make
fortune there, the trades being swamped by Germans, and the mines
controlled by Jews. Therefore, in their inability to follow the devious
paths of reasoning by which politicians explain away what they term
“ignorant and illiterate” conclusions, some of them begin to think that
the blood of their sons has been shed in hard battle, not so much for
the glory and good of the many, as for the private greed of the few.
They are no doubt wrong; but it will take something more than “secret”
enquiries to set them right.

Meanwhile, the passing of the social pageant interests them more
deeply than is apparent on the frothy surface of social things. Their
contempt is aroused and kept sullenly alive by daily contemplation of
the flagrant assertion of money-dominance over every other good. They
hear of one Andrew Carnegie strewing Free Libraries over the surface
of the country, as if these institutions were so many lollipops thrown
out of a schoolboy’s satchel; they follow the accounts of his doings
with a mingling of wonder and derision, some of them up in Scotland
openly and forcibly regretting the mischief done to the famed “grit and
grip” of Scottish students, who are not now, as of yore, forced by hard
necessity to work for their University education themselves, and win
it, as it were, by the very skin of their teeth. Hard necessity is a
fine taskmaster, and turns out splendid scholars and useful men. But
when educational advantages are thrown headlong at aspiring students,
and Universities are opened freely, as though they were a species of
pauper-refuge, the delights of learning are apt to be proportionately
cheapened and lessened. Lads with real ability naturally and invariably
seek to do something that shall prove their own capabilities of pluck
and endurance; and a truly independent spirit not only chafes at,
but absolutely resents, assistance. Thus it has come to pass that
Mr. Carnegie’s Free Libraries are looked upon by hosts of people as
so many brick and mortar advertisements of his own great wealth and
unfailing liberality. A labour leader of some repute among his own
class, remarked the other day that “the Carnegie libraries were like
‘So-and-So’s Pills,’ posted up everywhere lest the inventor’s name
should be forgotten!” This was an unkind, and perhaps an ungrateful
observation, but we have to recollect that a People, taken _as_ a
People, do not want to be grateful for anything. They want to work
for all they get, and to feel that they have honestly deserved their
earnings. It is only the drones of the hive that seek to be taken care
of. The able citizen strenuously objects to be helped in obtaining
sustenance for either his soul or his body. What is necessary for him,
that he will fight for, and, having won the battle, he enjoys the
victory. There is no pleasure in conquering an enemy, if a policeman
has helped you to knock him down.

Thus, with many of the more independently-thinking class, millionaire
Carnegie’s money, pitched at the public, savours of “patronage” which
they resent, and ostentation which they curtly call “swagger.” Free
Libraries are by no means essential to perfect happiness, while they
may be called extremely detrimental to the prosperity of authors. A
popular author would have good reason to rejoice if his works were
excluded from Free Libraries, inasmuch as his sales would be twice,
perhaps three times as large. If a Free Library takes a dozen copies of
a book, that dozen copies has probably to serve for five or six hundred
people, who get it in turn individually. But if the book could not
possibly be obtained for gratuitous reading in this fashion, and could
only be secured by purchase, then it follows that five or six hundred
copies would be sold instead of twelve. This applies only to authors
whose works the public clamour for, and insist on reading; with the
more select “unpopular” geniuses the plan, of course, would not meet
with approval. In any case, a Free Library is neither to an author,
nor to the reading public, an unmitigated boon. One has to wait for
months sometimes for the book specially wanted; sometimes one’s name
is 1,000 on the list, though certain volumes known as “heavy stock”
can always be obtained immediately on application, but are seldom
applied for. Real book-lovers buy their books and keep them. Reading
which is merely haphazard and casual is purely pernicious, and does
far more harm than good. However, Carnegie, being the possessor of
millions, probably does not know what else to do with the cash except
in the way of Libraries. To burden a human biped with tons of gold,
and then set him adrift to get rid of it as best he may, is one of the
scurviest tricks of Fortune. Inasmuch as ostentation is the trade mark
of vulgarity, and a rich man cannot spend his money without at least
_appearing_ ostentatious. The revival of the spinning and silk-weaving
industries in England would be a far nobler and more beneficial help
to the country and to the many thousands of people, than any number
of Free Libraries, yet no millionaire comes forward to offer the
needful assistance towards this deserving end. But perhaps a hundred
looms set going, with their workers all properly supported, would not
be so prominently noticed in the general landscape as a hundred Free
Libraries.

Apart from the manner in which certain rich men spend their wealth,
there is something in an overplus of riches which is distinctly “out
of drawing,” and lop-sided. It is a false note in the musical scale.
Just as a woman, by wearing too great a number of jewels, vulgarizes
whatever personal beauty she may possess by the flagrant exhibition of
valuables and bad taste together, so does a man who has no other claim
upon society than that of mere wealth, appear as a kind of monstrosity
and deformity in the general equality and equilibrium of Nature. When
such a man’s career is daily seen to be nothing more than a constant
pursuit of his own selfish ends, regardless of truth, honour, high
principle, and consideration for his fellow-men, he becomes even more
than a man-camel with a golden hump--he is an offence and a danger to
the community. If, by mere dint of cash, he is allowed to force his
way everywhere--if no ruling sovereign on the face of the earth has
sufficient wisdom or strength of character to draw a line against the
entrance into society and politics of Money, for mere Money’s sake,
then the close of our circle of civilisation is nearly reached, and
the old story of Tyre and Sidon and Babylon will be re-told again for
us with the same fatal conclusion to which Volney, in his _Ruins of
Empires_ impressively calls attention, in the following passage:

“Cupidity, the daughter and companion of ignorance, has produced
all the mischiefs that have desolated the globe. Ignorance and the
love of accumulation, these are the two sources of all the plagues
that infest the life of man. They have inspired him with false ideas
of his happiness, and prompted him to misconstrue and infringe the
laws of nature, as they related to the connection between him and
exterior objects. Through them his conduct has been injurious to his
own existence, and he has thus violated the duty he owes to himself;
they have fortified his heart against compassion, and his mind against
the dictates of justice, and he has thus violated the duty he owes
to others. By ignorant and inordinate desire, man has armed himself
against man, family against family, tribe against tribe, and the earth
is converted into a bloody theatre of discord and robbery. They have
sown the seeds of secret war in the bosom of every state, divided
the citizens from each other, and the same society is constituted of
oppressors and oppressed, of masters and slaves. They have taught the
heads of nations, with audacious insolence, to turn the arms of society
against itself, and _to build upon mercenary avidity the fabric of
political despotism_, or they have a _more hypocritical and deep-laid
project, that imposes, as the dictate of heaven, lying sanctions and
a sacrilegious yoke, thus rendering avarice the source of credulity_.
In fine, they have corrupted every idea of good and evil, just and
unjust, virtue and vice; they have misled nations in a _labyrinth
of calamity and mistake_. Ignorance and the love of accumulation!
These are the malevolent beings that have laid waste the earth; these
are the decrees of fate that have overturned empires; these are the
celestial maledictions that have struck these walls, once so glorious,
and converted the splendour of populous cities into a sad spectacle of
ruins!”

Laughable, yet grievous, is the childish conduct of many American
plutocrats who are never tired of announcing in the daily Press that
they are spending Three Thousand Pounds on roses for one afternoon’s
“At Home,” or Five Thousand Pounds on one single banquet! After this,
why should we call the Roman Heliogabalus a sensualist and voluptuary?
His orgies were less ostentatious than many social functions of to-day.
It is not, we believe, recorded that he paid any “fashion-papers”
(if there were any such in the Roman Empire) to describe his “Feasts
of Flowers,” though a lively American lady, giving out her “social
experiences” recently at an “Afternoon tea” said gaily: “I always send
an account of my dinners, my dresses, and the dresses of my friends to
‘_The ----_’ with a cheque. Otherwise, you know, I should never get
myself or my parties mentioned at all!” One is bound to entertain the
gravest doubts as to the truth of her assertion, knowing, of course,
that of all institutions in the world, the Press, in Great Britain at
any rate, is the last to be swayed by financial considerations. One
has never heard (in England at least) of any “Company” paying several
thousand pounds to the Press for “floating it.” Though such things
may be done in America, they are never tolerated here. But, the Press
apart, which in its unblemished rectitude “shines like a good deed
in a naughty world,” most things in modern politics and society are
swayed by money considerations, and the sudden acquisition of wealth
does not in many cases improve the morality of the person so favoured,
or persuade him to discharge such debts as he may have incurred in
his days of limited means. On the contrary, he frequently ignores
these, and proceeds to incur fresh liabilities, as in the striking
case of a lady “leader of society” at the present day, who, having
owed large sums to certain harmless and confiding tradesmen for the
past seven or eight years, ignores these debts or “shunts them,” and
spends six thousand pounds recklessly on the adornment of rooms for
the entertainment of Royalty--which fact most notably proclaims her
vulgarity, singularly allied to her social distinction. The payment of
her debts first, and the entertainment of great personages afterwards,
would seem to be a nobler and more becoming thing.

But show and vanity, pride and “bounce,” appear to have taken the
place of such old-fashioned virtues as simplicity, sincerity, and that
genuine hospitality which asserts nothing, but gives all.


     Kind hearts are more than coronets,
     And simple faith than Norman blood.


In very few cases does immense wealth seem to go hand in hand with
refinement, reserve and dignity. Millionaires are for the most part
ill-mannered and illiterate, and singularly uninteresting in their
conversation. A certain millionaire, occupying during some seasons
one of the fine old Scottish Castles whose owners still take pride
in the fact that its walls once sheltered “bonnie Prince Charlie,”
can find little to do with himself and his “house-party,” but fill
the grand old drawing-room with tobacco-smoke and whisky-fumes of
an evening, and play “Bridge” for ruinous stakes on Sundays, of all
days in the week. During other hours and days he goes out shooting,
or drives a motor-car. Intellectually speaking, the man is less of a
real personality than the great Newfoundland dog he owns. But measured
by gold he is a person of enormous importance--a human El Dorado. And
his banking-account is the latchkey with which he opens the houses of
the great and intrudes his coarse presence through the doors of royal
palaces; whereas if by some capricious stroke of ill-luck he had not
a penny left in the world, those same doors would be shut in his face
with a bang.

The vulgarity of wealth is daily and hourly so broadly evidenced
and apparent, that one can well credit a strange rumour prevalent
in certain highly exclusive circles, far removed from the “swagger
set,” to the effect that with one more turn of blind Fortune’s wheel,
the grace of Poverty will become a rare social distinction. The Poor
Gentleman, it is said, will be eagerly sought after, and to be seen in
his company will entitle one to respect. The man of money will stand
outside the ring of this Society, which is in process of formation for
the revival of the Art of Intelligent Conversation and the Cultivation
of Good Manners. Ladies who dress with a becoming simplicity, and who
are not liable to the accusation of walking about with clothes unpaid
for, will be eligible for membership,--and young men who are not
ashamed to emphatically decline playing cards on Sunday will be equally
welcome in the select coterie. Limited means will be considered more
of a recommendation than a drawback, and visits will be interchanged
among the members on the lines of unaffected hospitality, offered with
unassuming friendship and sincerity. Kindness towards each other,
punctilious attention to the smallest courtesies of life, unfailing
chivalry towards women, and honour to men, will be the prevailing
“rules” of the community, and every attempt at “show,” either in
manners or entertainment, will be rigorously forbidden and excluded.
The aim of the Society will be to prove the truth of the adage that
“Manners makyth the man,” as opposed to the modern reading, “Money
makyth the nobleman.” Bearing in mind that the greatest reformers and
teachers of the world were seldom destitute of the grace of Poverty, it
will be deemed good and necessary to make a stand for this ancient and
becoming Virtue, which as a learned writer says, “doth sit on a wise
man more becomingly than royal robes on a king.” Many who entertain
this view are prepared to unite their forces in making well-born and
well-bred Poverty the fashion. For in such a scheme, singular as it may
appear, there is just a faint chance of putting up a barrier against
boorish Plutocracy (which is a more unwieldy and offensive power than
Democracy), and also of asserting the existence of grander national
qualities than greed, avarice, and self-indulgence, which humours, if
allowed to generate and grow in the minds of a people, result in the
ravaging sickness of such a pestilence of evil as cannot be easily
stayed or remedied. There has been enough, and too much of the Idolatry
of Money-bags--it is time the fever of such insanity should abate and
cool down. To conclude with another admirable quotation from Mr. Lecky:
“Of colossal fortunes only a very small fraction can be truly said to
minister to the personal enjoyment of the owner. The disproportion in
the world between pleasure and cost is indeed almost ludicrous. The two
or three shillings that gave us our first Shakespeare would go but a
small way towards providing one of the perhaps untasted dishes on the
dessert table. The choicest masterpieces of the human mind--the works
of human genius that through the long course of centuries have done
most to ennoble, console, brighten, and direct the lives of men, might
all be purchased--I do not say by the cost of a lady’s necklace, but
by that of one or two of the little stones of which it is composed.
Compare the relish with which the tired pedestrian eats his bread and
cheese with the appetites with which men sit down to some stately
banquet; compare the level of spirits at the village dance with that
of the great city ball whose lavish splendour fills the society papers
with admiration; compare the charms of conversation in the college
common room with the weary faces that may be often seen around the
millionaire’s dinner table, and we may gain a good lesson of the
vanity of riches.”

And, we may add, of the vulgarity of those who advertise their wealth
by ostentation, as well as of those who honour Purses more than
Principles.




AMERICAN WOMEN IN ENGLAND


Why is the American woman so popular in English society? Why is her
charmingly assertive personality acknowledged everywhere? Why is she
received by knights and earls and belted churls with such overpowering
enthusiasm? Surely something subtle, elusive and mysterious, clings to
her particular form, nature and identity, for more often than not, the
stolid Britisher, while falling at her feet and metaphorically kissing
the hem of her garment, wonders vaguely how it is that she manages to
make such a fool of him! To which, she might reply, on demand, that if
he were not a fool already, she would not find her task so easy! For
the American woman is, above all women in the world, clever--or let
us say “brainy” to an almost incredible height of brainyness. She is
“all there.” She can take the measure of a man in about ten minutes
and classify him as though he were a botanical specimen. She realizes
all his limitations, his “notions,” and his special and particular
fads,--and she has the uncommonly good sense not to expect much of
him. She would not “take any” on the lily-maid of Astolat, the fair
Elaine, who spent her time in polishing the shield of Lancelot, and who
finally died of love for that most immoral but fascinating Knight of
the Round Table. No, she wouldn’t polish a shield, you bet! She would
make Lancelot polish it himself for all he was worth, and polish her
own dear little boots and shoes for her into the bargain. That is one
of her secrets--masterfulness--or, let us say queenliness, which sounds
better. The Lord of creation can do nothing in the way of ordering
_her_ about,--because, as the Lady of creation she expects to order
_him_ about,--and she does! She expects to be worked for, worshipped
and generally attended to,--and she gets her way. What she wants, she
will have,--though “Companies” smash, and mighty Combines split into
infinite nothingness; and more than any tamer of wild forest animals
she makes all her male lions and bears dance at her bidding.

Perhaps the chief note in the ever-ascending scale of her innumerable
attractions is her intense vitality. The mixed blood of many
intelligent races courses through her delicate veins and gives a
joyous lightness to the bounding of her heart and the swift grace of
her step. She is full of energy as well as charm. If she sets out to
enjoy herself, she enjoys herself thoroughly. She talks and laughs
freely. She is not a mere well-dressed automaton like the greater
majority of upper-class British dames. She is under the impression,--(a
perfectly correct one) that tongues were given to converse with, and
that lips, especially pretty ones, were made to smile with. She is,
taken at her best, eminently good-natured, and refreshingly free from
the jaundiced spite against others of her own sex which savours the
afternoon chitter-chatter of nine out of every ten English spinsters
and matrons taken together in conclave. She would, on the whole,
rather say a kind thing than a cruel one. Perhaps this is because she
is herself always so triumphant in her social career,--because she is
too certain of her own power to feel “the pangs of unrequited love,”
or to allow herself to be stung by the “green-eyed monster,” jealousy.
Her car is always rolling over roses,--there is always a British title
going a-begging,--always some decayed or degenerate or semi-drunken
peer, whose fortunes are on the verge of black ruin, ready and willing
to devour, monster-like, the holocaust of an American virgin, provided
bags of bullion are flung, with her, into his capacious maw. Though
certainly one should look upon the frequent marriages of American
heiresses with effete British nobles, as the carrying out of a wise
and timely dispensation of Providence. New blood--fresh sap, is sorely
needed to invigorate the grand old tree of the British aristocracy,
which has of late been looking sadly as though dry rot were setting
in,--as though the woodlice were at work in its heart, and the rats
burrowing at its root. But, by the importation of a few clean-minded,
sweet-souled American women, some of the most decayed places in the
venerable stem have been purged and purified,--the sap has risen, and
new boughs and buds of promise are sprouting. And it is full time that
this should be. For we have had to look with shame and regret upon
many of our English lords caught in gambling dens,--and shown up in
dishonourable bankruptcies;--some of them have disported themselves
upon the “variety” stage, clad in women’s petticoats and singing comic
songs for a fee,--others have “hired themselves out” as dummy figures
of attraction at evening parties, accepting five guineas for each
appearance,--and they have become painfully familiar objects in the
Divorce Court, where the stories of their most unsavoury manners and
customs, as detailed in the press, have offered singular instruction
and example to those “lower” classes whom they are supposed to more or
less influence. A return to the old motto of “noblesse oblige” would
not be objectionable; a re-adopting of old _un_-blemished scutcheons
of honour would be appreciated, even by the so-called “vulgar,”--and a
great noble who is at the same time a great man, would in this present
day, be accepted by all classes with an universal feeling of grateful
surprise and admiration.

But, _revenons à nos moutons_,--the social popularity of the American
woman in English society. That she is popular is an admitted and
incontestable fact. She competes with the native British female
product at every turn,--in her dress, in her ways, in her irresistible
vivacity, and above all in her intelligence. When she knows things, she
lets people know that she knows things. She cannot sit with her hands
before her in stodgy silence, allowing other folks to talk. That is an
English habit. No doubt the English girl or woman knows quite as much
as her American sister, but she has an unhappy knack of assuming to
be a fool. She says little, and that little not to much purpose,--she
looks less,--it is dimly understood that she plays hockey, tennis and
golf, and has large feet. She is an athletic Enigma. I write this, of
course, solely concerning those British women, young, middle-aged
and elderly, who make “sport” and out-door exercise the chief aim and
end of existence. But I yield to none in my love and admiration for
the real, genuine, _un_modernised English maiden, at her gentlest and
best,--she is the rosebud of the world. And I tender devout reverence
and affection to the _un_-fashionable, single-hearted, dear, loving
and ever-beloved English wife and mother--she is the rose in all its
full-blown glory. Unfortunately, however, these English rosebuds
and roses are seldom met with in the sweltering, scrambling crowd
called “society.” They dwell in quiet country-places where the lovely
influences of their modest and retiring lives are felt but never seen.
Society likes to be seen rather than felt. There is all the difference.
And in that particular section of it whose aim is seeing to be seen,
and seen to be seeing, the American woman is as an oasis in the desert.
She also wants to be seen,--but she expresses that desire so naïvely,
and often so bewitchingly, that it is a satisfaction to every one to
grant her request. She also would see,--and her eyes are so bright and
roving and restless, that Mother Britannia is perforce compelled to
smile indulgently, and to open all her social picture-books for the
pleasure of the spoilt child of eternal Mayflower pedigree. It has to
be said and frankly admitted too, that much of the popularity attending
an American girl when she first comes over to London for a “season” is
due to an idea which the stolid Britisher gets into his head, namely,
that she has, she _must_ have, Money. The American girl and Money are
twins, according to the stolid Britisher’s belief. And when the stolid
Britisher fixes something--anything--into the passively-resisting
matter composing his brain, it would take Leviathan, with, not one,
but several hooks, to _un_fix it. And thus it often happens that the
sight of a charmingly dressed, graceful, generally “smart” American
girl attracts the stolid Britisher in the first place because he says
to himself--“Money!” He knows all the incomes of all the best families
in his own country,--and none of them are big enough to suit him. But
the American girl arrives as more or less of a financial mystery. She
may have thousands,--she may have millions,--he can never be quite
sure. And he does all he can to ingratiate himself with her and give
her a good time “on spec.” to begin with, while he makes cautious and
diplomatic enquiries. If his hopes rest on a firm basis, his attentions
are redoubled--if, on the contrary, they are built on shifting sand, he
gradually diminishes his ardour and like a “wilting flower” fades and
“fizzles” away.

I am here reminded of a certain Earl, renowned in the political and
social world, who, when he was a young man, went over on a visit to
America and there fell, or feigned to fall, deeply in love with a
very sweet, very beautiful, very gentle and lovable American girl.
In a brief while he became engaged to her. The engagement was made
public--the wedding day was almost fixed. The girl’s father was
extremely wealthy, and she was the only child and sole heiress. But an
unfortunate failure,--a gigantic collapse in the money market, made
havoc of the father’s fortunes, and as soon as his ruin was declared
beyond a doubt, the noble Earl, without much hesitation or ado, broke
off his engagement, and rapidly decamped from the States back to
his own country, where, as all the world knows, he did very well for
himself. Strange to say, however, the girl whom he had thus brutally
forsaken for no fault of her own, had loved him with all the romantic
and trusting tenderness of first love, and the heartless blow inflicted
upon her by his noble and honourable lordship was one from which she
never recovered. The Noble and Honourable has, I repeat, done very
well for himself, though it is rumoured that he sleeps badly, and that
he has occasionally been heard muttering after the fashion of Hamlet,
Prince of Denmark,--“Oh God, I could be bounded in a nutshell and count
myself a king of infinite space were it not that I have bad dreams!”

Marriage, however, is by no means the only, or even the chief
resource in life of the American woman. She evidently looks with a
certain favour on the holy estate of matrimony and is quite willing
to become an excellent wife and mother if the lines of her destiny
run that way, but if they should happen to branch out in another
direction, she wastes no time in useless pining. She is too vital,
too capable, too intelligent and energetic altogether to play the
_rôle_ of an interesting martyr to male neglect. She will teach, or
she will lecture,--she will sing, or she will act,--she will take her
degrees in medicine and surgery,--she will practise for the Bar,--she
will write books, and the days are fast approaching when she will
become a high priestess of the Church, and will preach to the lost
sheep of Israel as well as to the equally lost ones of New York or
Chicago;--she will be a “beauty doctor,” a “physical culture” woman,
a “medium,” a stock-broker, a palmist, a florist, a house-decorator,
a dealer in lace and old curiosities,--ay! she will even become a
tram-car conductor if necessity compels and the situation is open to
her,--and she will manage a cattle ranch as easily as a household,
should opportunity arise. Marriage is but one link in the long chain
of her general efficiency, and like Cleopatra, “age cannot wither her,
nor custom stale Her infinite variety.” A curious fact and one worth
noting is, that we seldom or never hear Americans use the ill-bred
expression “old maid” when alluding to such of their feminine relatives
or friends who may happen to remain unmarried. They know too well
that these confirmed and settled spinsters are as capable and as well
to the front in the rush of life as the wedded wives, if not more
so,--they know that among these unmarried feminine forces they have
to reckon with some of the cleverest heads of the day, to whom no
opprobrious term of contempt dare be applied,--women who are editors
and proprietors of great newspapers,--women who manage famous schools
and colleges,--women who, being left with large fortunes, dispense the
same in magnificently organized but _un_advertised charities,--women
who do so command by their unassisted influence certain social
movements and events, that if indeed they _were_ to marry, something
like confusion and catastrophe might ensue among the circles they
control by the introduction of a new and possibly undesirable element.
“Old maid,” may apply to the unfortunate female who has passed all the
days of her youth in talking about men and in failing to catch so much
as one of the wandering tribe, and who, on arriving at forty years,
meekly retires to the chimney corner with shawl over her shoulders and
some useful knitting,--but it carries neither meaning nor application
to the brisk, brilliant American spinster who at fifty keeps her trim
svelte figure, dresses well, goes here, there and everywhere, and
sheds her beaming smile with good-natured tolerance, and perchance
something of gratitude as well, on the men she has escaped from. Life
does not run only in one channel for the American Woman. She does not
“make tracks” solely from the cradle to the altar, from the altar
to the grave. She realizes that there is more fun to be got out of
being born than just this little old measure meted out to her by the
barbaric males of earliest barbaric periods, when women were yoked to
the plough with cattle. And it is the innate consciousness of her own
power and intelligent ability that gives her the dominating charm,--the
magnetic spell under which the stolid Britisher falls more or less
stricken, stupefied and inert. He is never a great talker; she is.
Her flow of conversation bewilders him. She knows so much too--she
chatters of Shakespeare, Byron, Shelley, Keats--and he thinks he has
heard of these people somewhere before. He listens dumbly. Sometimes
he scratches his head,--occasionally he feels his moustache, if he has
one. When she laughs, he smiles slowly and dubiously. He hopes she is
not laughing at _him_. He feels--he feels--dontcherknow--that she is
“ripping.” He couldn’t tell you what he means by “ripping” to save
his life. But painfully accustomed as he is to the dull and listless
conversation of the British materfamilias, and to the half-hoydenish
conduct of the British tom-boy girl who _will_ insist on playing golf
and hockey with him in order not to lose him out of her sight, he is
altogether refreshed and relieved when the American Woman dawns upon
his cloudy horizon, and instead of waiting upon _him_, commands him
to wait upon _her_, with one dazzling look of her bright, audacious
eye. The American Woman is not such a fool as to go play hockey with
him at all times and in all weathers, thereby allowing him to take the
unchecked measure of her ankles. She is too clever to do anything that
might possibly show her in an unlovely or ungraceful light. She takes
care to keep her hands soft and small and white, that they may be duly
caressable,--and makes the best and prettiest of herself on all and
every occasion. And that she has succeeded in taking English society
by storm is no matter of surprise. English society, unmixed with any
foreign element, is frequently said to be the dullest in the world. It
is an entertainment where no one is entertained. A civil apathy wraps
each man and woman in its fibrous husk, and sets them separately apart
behind barricades of the most idiotic conventionality. The American
Woman is the only being that can break down these barricades and tear
the husk to shreds. No wonder she is popular! The secret of her success
is in her own personal charm and vivacious intelligence,--in her light
scorn of stupid ceremonies,--in the frank geniality of her disposition
(when she can manage to keep it unspoilt by contact with the reserved
hypocrisy of the “Smart Set,”) and the delightful spontaneity of her
thoughts which find such ready expression in equally spontaneous
speech. Altogether the American Woman is a valuable importation into
Great Britain. She is an incarnation of the Present, and an embryo
of the Future. She is a gifted daughter of the British race, holding
within her bright, vital, ambitious identity many of the greater
possibilities of Britain. And to the question “Why is she popular?” the
answer is simple--“Because she deserves to be!”




THE AMERICAN BOUNDER


Everything in America is colossal, stupendous and pre-eminent,--it
follows, therefore, that the American “bounder” is the most colossal,
stupendous and pre-eminent bounder in existence. None of his tribe can
match him in “brass,”--none of his European forbears or connections
can equal him in brag. He is an inflated bladder of man, swollen out
well-nigh to bursting with the wind of the Yankee Doodle Eagle’s wing.
His aim in life appears to be to disgrace his country by his manners,
his morals and his conversation. He arrives in Europe with the air
of laying Europe under a personal debt of obligation to Providence
for having kindly permitted him to be born. As befits a son of the
goddess Liberty, he sets his proud foot on the “worn out” soil of the
Old World and prances there, even as the “wild ass” mentioned in Holy
Writ. As a citizen of the greatest Republic over which any starred or
striped flag ever flew, he extends his gracious patronage to tottering
monarchies, and allows it to be understood that he tolerates with an
amused compassion that poor, drivelling, aged and senile institution
known as the Aristocracy. He alludes to “my friend the Duke,” casually,
as one might speak of a blind beggar. He throws in a remark quite
unexpectedly at times concerning “Betty--_you’ve_ heard of her surely?
Countess Betty--the Countess of Hockyfield--oh yes!--you English snobs
rather ‘kotow’ to her, but _I_ call her Betty!--she likes it!” He may
frequently be found in residence on the fourth floor back of a swagger
hotel, occupying a “bed-sitting room” littered with guide books,
“yellow” journalism, and dubious French novels, with an impressionist
sketch of the newest Paris “danseuse” in her most suggestive want of
attire set conspicuously forward for inspection. If chance visitors
happen to notice flowers on his table, he at once seethes into a
simmering scum of self-adulation. “Charming, are they not!” he
says--“So sweet! So dear of the Duchess to send them!--she knows how
fond I am of Malmaisons!--did you notice that Malmaison?--the Duchess
gathered it for me herself--it is from one of the Sandringham stock.
Of course you know the carnation houses at Sandringham? Alex. delights
in Malmaisons!” And when guileless strangers gasp and blink as they
realize that it is England’s gracious Queen-Consort who is being spoken
of as “Alex.” in the company of the soiled literature and the portrait
of the Paris “danseuse” the Bounder is delighted. He feels he has made
a point. He chortles cheerfully on--“What a rotten old country this
is after all, eh? Just crawling alive with snobs! Everyone’s on their
knees to a title, and the sight of a lord seems to give the average
Britisher a fit. Now look at me! I don’t care a cent about your dukes
and earls. Why should I? I’m always with ’em--fact is, they can’t bear
to have me out of their sight! Lady Belinda Boomall--second daughter
of the Duke of Borrowdom,--she’s just mad on me! She thinks I’ve
got money, and I let her! It’s real fun! And as to the Marchioness
Golfhouse--she’s up to some games _I_ tell you! _She_ knows a thing or
two! My word!” Here he gives vent to a sound suggestive of something
between a sneeze and a snigger which is his own particular way of
rendering the laugh satirical. “I always get on with your blue-blooded
girls!”--he proceeds; “I guess they’re pretty tired of their own men
hulking round! They take to an Am_urr_ican as ducks take to water.
See all those cards?”--pointing in a casual way to half a dozen or
so of pasteboard slips littered on the mantelshelf, among which
the discerning observer might certainly see one or two tradesmen’s
advertisements--“They just shower ’em on me! I’ve got an ‘at home’
to-night and a ball afterwards--to-morrow I breakfast at Marlborough
House;--then lunch with Lady Adelaide Sparkler,--she drives me in the
Park afterwards--and in the evening I dine at St. James’ Palace and go
to the Opera with the Rothschilds. It’s always like that with me! I
never have a moment to myself. All these people want me. Lady Adelaide
Sparkler declares she cannot possibly do without me! I ought to have
been at Stafford House this afternoon--great show on there--but I can’t
be bothered!--the Duchess is just too trying for words sometimes! Of
course it’s all a question of connection;--they know who I am and all
about my ancestors, and that makes ’em so anxious to have me. You know
who my ancestors were?”

Now when the American Bounder puts this question, he ought to receive a
blunt answer. Perhaps if Britishers were as rude as they are sometimes
reported to be, one of them would give such an answer straight. He
would say “No, I do not; but I expect you sprang from a convict root of
humanity thrown out as bad rubbish from an over-populated prison and
cast by chance into American soil beside an equally rank native Indian
weed--and that in your present bad form and general condition, you are
the expressive result of that disastrous combination.” But, as a rule,
even the most truculent Britisher’s natural pluck is so paralysed by
the American Bounder’s amazing capacity for lying, that in nine cases
out of ten, he merely murmurs an inarticulate negative. Whereat the
Bounder at once proceeds to enlighten him--“I am the direct descendant
of the Scroobys of Scrooby in Yorkshire,”--he resumes--“_My_ name’s
not Scrooby--no!--but that has nothing to do with it. The families
got mixed. Scrooby of Scrooby went over to Holland in 1607 and joined
the Pilgrim Fathers. He was quite a boy, but Elder Brewster took care
of him! He held the Bible when Brewster first fell upon his knees
and thanked God. So you see I really come from Yorkshire. Real old
Yorkshire ham ‘cured’ into an Am_urr_ican!”

After this, there is nothing more to be said. Questions of course might
be asked as to how the “Yorkshire ham” not being “Scrooby” now, ever
started from “Scrooby” in the past, only it is not worth while. It
never is worth while to try and certify an American Bounder’s claim to
being sprung from a dead and gone family of English gentlemen. Regard
for the dead and gone English gentlemen should save them from this
affront to their honourable dust.

Perhaps the most amazing thing about the American Bounder after his
free and easy familiarities with “Bertie” (the King) “Alex.” (the
Queen) and “Georgie and May” (the Prince and Princess of Wales) is
his overweening, self-satisfied, complacent and arrogant ignorance.
The most blatant little local tradesman who, through well-meaning
Parliamentary short-sightedness in educational schemes, becomes
a “governor” of a Technical School in the provinces, is never so
blatantly ignorant as he. He talks of everything and knows nothing.
He assumes to have the last word in science, art and literature. He
will tell you he is “great chums” with Marconi and Edison, and that
these famous discoverers and inventors always lay their heads on his
bosom and tell him their dearest confidences. He knows just what is
going to be done by everybody with everything. He is friends with the
Drama too. Beerbohm Tree rings him up on the telephone at all manner
of strange hours, thirsting for his advice on certain “scenes” and
“effects.” He is--to use his own words--“doing a great thing” for
Tree! Sarah Bernhardt is his very dearest of dear ones! She has fallen
into his arms, coming off the stage at the side wings, exhausted, and
exclaiming--“Toi, mon cher! Enfin! Maintenant, je respire!” Madame
Réjane is always at home to him. In fact all Paris hails him with a joy
too deep for tears. He would not be a true “Am_urr_ican” if _he_ did
not love Paris, and if Paris did not love _him_.

But though he is completely “at one,” according to his own statement,
with most of the celebrated personages of the day, if not all, he
cannot tell you the most commonly known facts about them to save his
life. And though--again according to his own statement--he has read
every book ever published, visited every picture gallery, “salon”
and theatre in Europe, he cannot pronounce the name of one single
foreign author or artist correctly. His English is bad enough, but
his French is worse. He seldom makes excursions into the Italian
language--“Igh--talian” as he calls it, but it is quite enough for
the merest beginner in the Tuscan tongue to hear him say “gondòla”
to take the measure of his capacity. “Gòndola” is a word so easily
learned and so often used in Italian, that one might think any
child could master its pronunciation from twice hearing it--but the
American Bounder makes the whole tour of Italy without losing a scrap
of his own special nasal lingo, and returns in triumph to talk of
the “gondòla” and the “bella ràgg-azza” (instead of ragàzza) till
one’s ears almost ache with the hideous infliction of his abominable
accent. In Switzerland he is always alluding to “Mount Blank”--the
“Can_tone_ Gry-son”--“N_oo_-shatell”--and the “Mountain Vert”--and
in Great Britain he has been heard to speak of Lo_che_ Kay-trine and
Ben _Nee_vis, as well as of Con_iss_ton and Cornwàll. But it is quite
“correct” he will tell you--it is only the English people who do not
know how to talk English. The actual, true, pure pronunciation of the
English language went over to the States with the Scroobys of Scrooby,
and he their descendant and Bounder, has preserved it intact. Even
Shakespeare’s river Avon becomes metamorphosed under the roll of his
atrocious tongue. He will not pronounce it with the English A, as in
the word “b_a_y,”--he calls it A’von, as the “a” is sounded in the word
_av_arice--so that the soft poetic name of the classic stream appears
to have been bitten off by him and swallowed like a pop-corn. But it
would be of no use to argue with him on this or on any other point,
because he is always right. No real American Bounder was ever wrong.

One cannot but observe what a close acquaintance the Bounder has with
Debrett and various “County” Directories. His study of these volumes
is almost as profound as that of Mr. Balfour must have been when
writing “The Foundations of Belief.” Between Debrett and Baedeker he
manages to elicit a certain useful stock of surface information which
he imparts in a kind of cheap toy-cracker fashion to various persons,
who, politely listening, wonder why he appears to think that they
are not aware of facts familiar to them from their childhood. His
modes of appearing “to know, you know!” are exceedingly simple. For
example, suppose him to be asked to join a “house-party” in Suffolk. He
straightway studies the “County Directory” of that quarter of England,
and looks up the principal persons mentioned therein in various other
books of handy reference. When, in due course, he arrives at the
house to which he has been invited, he manages to faintly surprise
uninitiated persons by his (apparently) familiar acquaintance with
the pedigree and history of this or that “county” magnate, and his
(apparently) intimate knowledge of such and such celebrated paintings
and “objets d’art” as adorn the various historical mansions in the
district--knowledge for which he is merely indebted to Baedeker. He
is as loquacious as a village washerwoman. He will relate any number
of scandalous stories in connection with the several families of
whose ways and doings he pretends to have such close and particular
information--and should any listener interrupt him with a mild “Pardon
me!--but, having resided in this neighbourhood all my life I venture
to think you must be mistaken”;--he merely smiles blandly at such a
display of “native” ignorance. “Lived here all your life and not know
that!” he exclaims--“My word! It takes an Am_urr_ican to teach you
what’s going on in your own country!”

Offensive as is this more or less ordinary type of American Bounder
who makes his “home in Yew-rope” on fourth floors of fashionable
hotels, a still worse and more offensive specimen is found in the
Starred-and-Striped Bounding Millionaire. This individual--who
has frequently attained to a plethora of cash through one of two
reprehensible ways--either by “sweating” labour, or by fooling
shareholders in “trust” companies,--comes to Great Britain with
the fixed impression that everything in the “darned old place”
can be bought for money. Unfortunately he is often right. The
British--originally and by nature proud, reserved, and almost savagely
tenacious of their freedom and independence--have been bitten by
the Transatlantic madness of mere Greed, and their blood has been
temporarily poisoned by infection. But one may hope and believe that it
is only a passing malady, and that the old healthy life will re-invest
the veins of the nation all the more strongly for partial sickness and
relapse. In the meantime it occasionally happens that the “free” Briton
bows his head like a whipped mongrel cur to the bulging Bank-Account of
the American Millionaire-Bounder. And the American Millionaire-Bounder
plants his flat foot on the so foolishly bent pate and walks over it
with a commercial chuckle. “You talk of your ‘Noblesse oblige,’ your
honour, your old historic tradition and aristocratic Order!” he says,
sneeringly--“Why there isn’t a man alive in Britain that I couldn’t
buy, principles and all, for fifty thousand pounds!”

This kind of vaunt at Britain’s expense is common to the American
Millionaire-Bounder--and whether it arises out of his conscious
experience of the British, or his braggart conceit, must be left to
others to query or determine. Certain it is that he _does_ buy a good
deal, and that the owners of such things as he wants seem always ready
to sell. Famous estates are knocked down to him--manuscripts and
pictures which should be the preciously guarded property of the nation,
are easily purchased by him,--and, laughing in his sleeve at the
purblind apathy of the British Government, which calmly looks on while
he pockets such relics of national greatness as unborn generations
will vainly and indignantly ask for,--he congratulates himself on
possessing, as he says, “the only few things the old country has got
left worth having.” One can but look gloomily through the “Calendar of
Shakespearean Rarities,” collected by Halliwell Phillips, which were
offered to the wealthy city of Birmingham for £7,000, and reflect that
this same wealthy city disgraced itself by refusing to purchase the
collection and by allowing everything to be bought and carried away
from England by “an American” in 1897. We do not say this American was
a “Bounder”--nevertheless, if he had been a real lover of Shakespeare’s
memory, rather than of himself, he would have bought these relics for
Shakespeare’s native country and presented them for Shakespeare’s sake
to Shakespeare’s native people, who are not, as a People, to blame
for the parsimony of their Governments. They pay taxes enough in all
conscience, and at least they deserve that what few relics remain of
their Greatest Man should be saved and ensured to them.

But perhaps the American Millionaire-Bounder is at his best when he has
bought an English newspaper and is running it in London. Then he feels
as if he were running the Imperial Government itself--nay, almost the
Monarchy. He imagines that he has his finger on the very pulse of Time.
He hugs himself in the consciousness that the British people,--that
large majority of them who are not behind the scenes--buy his paper,
believing it to be a British paper, not a journal of “Am_urr_ican”
opinion, that is, opinion as ordered and paid for by one “Am_urr_ican.”
He knows pretty well in his own mind that if they understood that such
was the actual arrangement, they would save their pence. Unfortunately
the great drawback of the “man in the street” who buys newspapers, is
that he has no time to enquire as to the way in which the journals he
confides in are “run.” If he knew that the particular view taken of the
political situation in a certain journal, was merely the political view
_ordered_ to be taken by one “Am_urr_ican”--naturally he would not pin
his simple faith upon it. Perhaps the Man in the Street will some day
wake up to the realization that in many cases, (though not all) with
respect to journalism, he only exists to be “gulled.”

Like all good and bad things, the American Bounder, whether millionaire
or only shabby-genteel, has a certain height beyond which he can
no further go--a point where he culminates in a blaze of ultra
Bounder-ism. This brilliant apotheosis is triumphantly reached in the
Female of his species. The American Female Bounder is the quintessence
of vulgarity, and in every way makes herself so objectionable even
to her own people and country that Americans themselves view her
departure for “Yew-rope” with perfect equanimity, and hope she will
never come back. Once in what she calls “the old country” she talks
all day long through her quivering nose of “Lady This” and “Countess
That.” One of this class I recall now as I write, who spoke openly of
a “Mrs. Countess So-and-So”--and utterly declined to be instructed in
any other form of address. She was not content to trace her lineage
to such humble folk as the “Scroobys of Scrooby”--no indeed, not she!
Kings were _her_ ancestors; her “family tree” sprouted from Richard the
Lion-Heart, according to her own bombastic assertion, and she, with her
loud twanging voice, odious manners and insufferable impertinence, was
“genuine stock” of royallest origin. Of course it is quite possible
that, as in horticulture, a once nobly cultivated human plant may,
if left without wholesome or fostering influences, degenerate into a
weed--but that so rank a weed as the American Female Bounder should
be the dire result of the Conqueror’s blood is open to honest doubt.
She generally has a “mission” to reform something or somebody,--she is
very often a “Christian science” woman, or a theosophist. Sometimes
she “takes up” Art as though it were a dustpan, and sweeps into it
under her “patronage” certain dusty and doubtful literary and musical
aspirants who want a “hearing” for their efforts. Fortunately for the
world, a “hearing” under the gracious auspices of the American Female
Bounder means a silence everywhere else. She is fond of “frocks and
frills”--and wears an enormous quantity of jewels, “stones” as she
calls them. She “pushes” herself in every possible social direction,
and wherever she sees she is not wanted, there, more particularly than
elsewhere, she contrives to force an entry. She embraces the game of
“Bridge” with passionate eagerness because she sees that by keeping
open house, with card-tables always ready, she can attract the loafing
“great ones of the earth,” and possibly persuade a “Mrs. Countess” to
befriend her. If she is fairly wealthy, she can generally manage to
do this. All Mrs. Countesses have not “that repose which stamps the
caste of Vere de Vere.” Some of them find the American Female Bounder
useful--and precisely in the manner she offers herself, even so they
take her. And thus it often happens that one frequently meets her
where she has no business to be. One is not surprised to find her at
Court, or in the Royal enclosure at Ascot, because so many of her
British sisters in the Bounder line are in these places, ready to give
her a helping hand--but one _is_ occasionally startled and in a manner
sorry to discover her making herself at home among certain “exclusive”
people who are chiefly distinguished for their good-breeding, culture
and refinement. In one thing, however, we can take much comfort, and
this is, that whatever the American Bounder, Male or Female, may
purchase or otherwise insidiously obtain in the Old World, neither
he nor she can ever secure respect. Driven to bay as the Britisher
may be by consummate and pertinacious lying, he can and does withhold
from the liars his honest esteem. He may sell a valuable manuscript or
picture to a “bounding” Yankee, out of sheer necessitous circumstance,
but he will never be “friends” with the purchaser. He will call him
“bounder” to the crack of doom, and Doomsday itself will not alter that
impression of him.

It may be, and it is I think, taken for granted that America itself
is very glad to get rid of its “bounders.” It regards them with as
much shame and distress as we feel when we see certain specimens of
“travelling English” disporting themselves upon the Continent in the
’Arry and Jemima way. We always fervently hope that our Continental
neighbours will not take these extraordinary roughs as bona-fide
examples of the British people, and in the same way America trusts all
the nations of Europe not to accept their “Bounders” as examples of
the real pith and power of the United States. The American People are
too great, too broad-minded, sane, and thorough, not to wish to shake
off these _aphides_ on their rose of life. They watch them “clearing
out” for “Yew-rope” with perfect satisfaction. Said a charming American
woman to me the other day--“What a pity it is that English people
_will_ keep on receiving Americans here who would not be tolerated for
a moment in New York or Boston society! It surprises us very greatly.
Sometimes indeed we cannot help laughing to see the names of women
figuring among your ‘haute noblesse’ who would never get inside a
decent house anywhere in the States. But more often we are sorry that
your social ‘leaders’ are so easily taken in!”

Here indeed is the sum total of the matter. If Great Britain--and other
countries in Europe--but Great Britain especially--did not “receive”
and encourage the American Bounder and Bounderess, these objectionable
creatures would never be known or heard of. Therefore it is our fault
that they exist. Were it not for our short-sighted foolishness, and
our proneness to believe that every “Am_urr_ican” with money must
be worth knowing, we should be better able to sort the sheep from
the goats. We should add to the pleasures of our social life and
intercourse an agreeable knowledge of the real American ladies, the
real American gentlemen; and though these are seldom seen over here,
for the very good reason that they are valued and wanted in their own
country, they could at least be certain, when they did come, of being
received at their proper valuation, and not set to herd with the
“Bounders” of their country, whom their country rejects. For one may
presume that there is some cogent reason why an American citizen of
the Greatest Republic in the world, should elect to desert his native
land and “settle down” under “rotten old monarchies.” People do not
leave the home of their birth for ever unless they find it impossible
to live there for causes best known to themselves. The poor are often
compelled to emigrate, we know, in the hope to find employment and
food in other countries--but when the rich “slope off” from the very
centres where they have made their capital, one may be permitted to
doubt the purity of their intentions. Anyway, surrounded as we are
to-day socially by American Bounders of every description,--American
Bounders who think themselves as good as any one else “and a darned
sight better”--American Bounders who declare that they are the “real
old British race renewed,”--American Bounders who “run” British
journals of “literary opinion” and so forth,--American Bounders who
thrust themselves into the company of unhappy kings and queens,--those
crowned slaves who in such earthquaking days as these have to be more
than common careful “not to offend,”--American Bounders who themselves
claim kinship with the blood royal,--the one straight and simple fact
remains--namely, that all the best Americans still live in America!




COWARD ADAM


Among the numerous fascinating and delightful members of the male
sex whom I have the honour to count as friends, there is one very
handsome and devotedly attentive gentleman of four years old, who is
particularly fond of reciting to me in private the following striking
poem on the Fall of Man.


     When Mister Sarpint did deceive
     Poor little silly Missis Eve,
     The Lord he spied an apple gone
     From off the branch it hanged upon;
     That apple was a heavy loss,
     And so the Lord got very cross,
     He searched the garden through and through,
     And called “Hi Adam! where are you?”
          But Mister Adam, he,
          Clum up a tree.


There is something in this graphic narrative which appears to tickle my
young cavalier’s fancy immensely, for whenever he says “Mister Adam,
he, Clum up a tree,” he opens his big blue eyes very widely, claps his
tiny hands very loudly, and gives vent to ecstatic shrieks of laughter.
It is quite evident that he entirely understands and appreciates Adam’s
position. Young as he is, he has the instinctive knowledge within him
that when the time comes, he will likewise adopt the “Clum up a tree”
policy. For Adam is the same Adam still, and nothing will ever change
him. And when things are getting rather “mixed” in his career, and the
forbidden fruit he has so readily devoured turns out to be rather more
sour and tasteless than he had anticipated,--when his Garden of Eden
is being searched through and through for the causes of the folly and
disobedience which have devastated its original fairness, the same old
story may be said of him--“Mister Adam, he, Clum up a tree.” Perhaps
if he only climbed a tree one might excuse him,--but unfortunately he
talks while climbing,--talks as though he were an old babbling grandam
instead of a lord of creation,--and grandam-like puts the blame on
somebody else. He says--“The woman whom thou gavest to be with me,
she gave me of the tree and I did eat.” Coward Adam! Observe how he
at once transfers the fault of his own lack of will and purpose to
the weaker, more credulous, more loving and trusting partner;--how he
leaves her defenceless to brave the wrath which he himself dreads,--and
how he never for one half second dreams of admitting himself to be the
least in the wrong! But there is always one great satisfaction to be
derived from the perusal of the strange old Eden story, and this is
that “Mister Sarpint” was of the male gender. Scripture leaves no room
for doubt on this point. It says: “Now the serpent was more subtil
than any beast of the field which the Lord God had made. And _he_ said
unto the woman----” So that a “he” tempted a woman, before “she” ever
tempted a “he.” Women should be duly thankful for the sex of “Mister
Sarpint,” and should also bear in mind that this particular “he” was
“more subtil than any beast of the field which the Lord God had made.”
On many an occasion it will be found a salutary and useful fact to
remember.

Once upon a time, so we are told, there was an Age of Chivalry. The
word “chivalry” is stated in the dictionary to be derived from the
French “cheval” a horse, and “chivalrous” men were, in the literal
meaning of the term, merely men who rode about on horseback. But
chivalry has somehow come to imply respect, devotion, and reverence
for women. The “chivalrous” knight is supposed to have gone all over
the world, wearing the glove or the ribbon of his “ladye faire,” in
his helmet, and challenging to single combat every other knight that
dared to question the supremacy of her beauty and virtue. I confess
at once that I do not believe in him. If he ever existed he must have
been a most unnatural and abnormal product of humanity, as unlike his
first progenitor Adam as he could well be. For even in the “Round
Table” romances one finds an entire lack of chivalry in the so-called
chivalrous knights of King Arthur. Their moral principles left much to
be desired, and the conduct of Sir Meliagraunce who betrayed the loves
of Lancelot and the Queen was merely that of a common sneak. Coward
Adam spoke in him, as in many of the Arthurian heroes,--and that they
were more “chivalrous” than the modern male gossips who jeer away a
woman’s name and honour in their smoking and gaming rooms, is a legend
which like that of the Tree of Good and Evil itself, requires stronger
confirmation than history as yet witnesseth.

Coward Adam, taking him as he appears in the present day, has lately
shown himself off in various odd phases and lamentable positions.
During the South African War he came out strong in some of our
generals, who put the blame of certain military mishaps on one another
like quarrelsome children, thereby losing dignity and offering a most
humiliating spectacle to the amazed British public. Coward Adam’s
policy, after making a blunder, is to adopt any lie, rather than say
frankly and boldly--“I did it!” He will eat dirt by the bushel in
preference to the nobler starvation act of singly facing his foes. He
is just now exhibiting himself to his usual advantage in the British
Parliament, while the nation looks on, waiting for the inevitable
finale of his various hesitations and inefficiencies--the “Mister
Adam, he, Clum up a tree.” For in most matters of social, political,
and moral progress, the great difficulty is to obtain an upright,
downright, honest and impartial opinion from any leading public man.
The nation may be drifting devilwards, but statesmen are judged to
be more statesmanlike, if they hold their tongues and watch it go.
They must not speak the truth. It would offend so many people. It
would upset so many interests. It would create a panic on the Stock
Exchange. It would throw Wall Street into hysterics. The world’s vast
public, composed of thinking, working, and more or less educated
and intelligent people, may and do crave for a bold utterance, a
truth openly enunciated and bravely maintained, but to the weavers
of political intrigue and the self-seeking schemers in Governmental
departments, the public is considered merely as a Big Child, to be
soothed with lollipop phrases and tickled by rattle promises. If the
Big Child cries and screams because it is hungry, they chirp to it
about Fair Trade,--if it complains that its ministers of religion
are trying to make it say its prayers backwards, they promise a full
“enquiry into recent abuses in the Church.” But fine words butter no
parsnips. Coward Adam always climbs up a tree as quickly as he can
when instead of fine words, fine deeds are demanded. Physical feats
of skill, physical gymnastics of all kinds he excels in, but a moral
difficulty always places him as it did in the Garden of Eden, in what
he would conventionally term “an awkward position.”

“Never kiss and tell” is I believe an “unwritten law of chivalry.”
This law, so I understand, Coward Adam does sometimes manage to obey,
albeit reluctantly. Because he would like to tell,--he would very much
like to tell,--if--if the story of the kiss did not involve himself
in the telling! But at this juncture “the unwritten laws of chivalry”
step in and he is saved. And chivalry is the tree up which he climbs,
chattering to himself the usual formula--“The woman whom thou gavest to
be with me,”--etcetera, etcetera. Alas, poor woman! She has heard him
saying this ever since she, in an unselfish desire to share her food
with him, gave him the forbidden apple. No doubt she offered him its
rosiest and ripest side! She always does,--at first. Not afterwards! As
soon as he turns traitor and runs up a tree, she takes to pelting him,
metaphorically speaking, with cocoa-nuts. This is quite natural on her
part. She _had_ thought him a man,--and when he suddenly changes into
a monkey, she doesn’t understand it. To this cause may possibly be
attributed some of the ructions which occasionally jar the harmonious
estate of matrimony.

Coward Adam does very well in America. He sees his position there
quite plainly. He knows that if he climbs his tree too often, hundreds
of feminine hands will pull him down. So he resigns himself to the
inevitable. He is not slow to repeat the customary whine--“The woman
whom thou gavest me”--but he says it quietly to himself between whiles.
Because he knows that _she_ knows all his share in the mischief!
So he digs and delves, and finds gold and silver and limitless oil
wherewith to turn into millions of dollars for her pleasure; he packs
pork, lays railway tracks, starts companies, organizes “combines”--and
strains every nerve and sinew to “do” every other Adam save himself
in his own particular line of business, so that “the woman” (or may
we say the women?) “whom thou gavest” may be clothed in Paris model
gowns, and wear jewels out-rivalling in size and lustre those of all
the kings and queens that ever made their sad and stately progress
through history. Indeed, Coward Adam, in the position he occupies as a
free citizen of that mighty Republic over which the wild eagle screams
exultingly, looks a little bit like a beaten animal. But he bears his
beating well, and is quite pleasant about it. In regard to “the woman
whom thou gavest me” he is nearer the imaginary code of “chivalry”
than his European brother. If the original Adam had learned the ways
of a modern American gentleman of good education and fine manners,
one can quite imagine him saying--“The woman whom thou gavest to be
with me generously offered me a share of the apple, and I did eat. But
the Serpent whom thou didst permit to tell lies to my amiable partner
concerning this special kind of fruit, was chiefly to blame.”

Coward Adam, as he is seen and known among the lower classes, crops up
every day in newspapers, which duly chronicle his various acts, such
as promising marriage to poor working girls and robbing them of all
their little savings, as well as of their good names,--kicking his
wife, starving his children, and spending every penny he earns in the
public-house. But he is just as frequently met with in the houses of
the Upper Ten. He will wear the garb of a lord with ease, and, entering
the house of another lord, will cozen his host’s wife away from loyalty
to her husband in quite the manner “friendly.” He is likewise to be
found occasionally in the walks of literature, and where a woman is
concerned in matters artistic will “down” her if he can. He has always
done his best to hinder woman from receiving any acknowledgment for
superior intellectual ability. Notably one may quote the case of Madame
Curie, the discoverer of radium. Coward Adam says she discovered it by
“a fluke”--that is to say, by chance. Most great discoveries occur,
even to men, in the same way. In the present instance the “chance”
came to a woman. Why should she not therefore have all the honour due
to her?--the same honour precisely as would fall to the lot of a man
in her place? Columns upon columns of praise would be bestowed upon
her were she of Adam’s sex, and all the academies of science would
contend with each other as to which should offer her the best and
most distinctive award. But Coward Adam cannot abide the thought that
“the woman whom thou gavest” should take an occasionally higher rank
than his own among the geniuses of his age. He must have everything
or nothing. He tries to ignore the fact that woman is winning equal
honours with himself in University degrees; he would fain forget that
the two greatest monarchs Great Britain ever had were women--Elizabeth
and Victoria. There is a brave Adam, of course--a civilized creature
who owns and admits the brilliant achievements of woman with pride and
tenderness,--I am only just now speaking of the coward specimen. The
brave Adam does not turn tail or climb trees, and he appears to have
had nothing to do with the Garden of Eden. Very likely he was born
somewhere else. For _he_ says--“The woman whom thou gavest to be with
me is the joy of my life,--the companion of my thoughts. To her my soul
turns,--for her my heart beats--in her I rejoice,--her triumphs are my
pride,--her success is my delight! If danger threatens her, I will be
her defender, not her accuser,--should she be blamed for aught, I will
take her fault upon myself, and will serve as a strong shield between
her and calumny. This is the least I can do to prove my love towards
her--for without her I should be the worst of creatures,--a lonely soul
in an empty world!”

So says, or may say brave Adam! But his coward brother does not
understand such high-flown sentiments. Coward Adam’s main object in
life is to “avoid a scene” with either the Lord Almighty, Mister
Sarpint or Missis Eve. He likes to wriggle out of difficulties,
both public and private, in a quiet way. He does not understand the
“methods” of plain blunt people who tell him frankly what a sneak he
is. He is very ubiquitous, and much more frequently to be met with than
his braver twin. And if he should chance to read what I have here set
down concerning him, he will probably say as usual: “The woman whom
thou gavest” in various forms of anonymous vituperation. But his active
policy will remain the same as it ever was--“Mister Adam, he, Clum up a
tree!”




ACCURSËD EVE


When the masculine Serpent, “who was more subtil than any beast of the
field which the Lord had made,” tempted the mother of mankind to eat
of the forbidden fruit, the Voice in the Garden said to her--“I will
greatly multiply thy sorrow!” It can scarcely be denied that this curse
has been fulfilled. So manifold and incessant have been the sorrows
of Woman since the legendary account of the creation of the world,
that one cannot help thinking the whole business somewhat unfair,
if,--for merely being “beguiled” by a beast of the field who was known
to be more “subtil” than any other, and afterwards being “given away”
by Coward Adam,--Eve and all the descendants of her sex should be
compelled to suffer centuries of torture. The injustice is manifestly
cruel and arbitrary,--yet it would seem to have followed poor Accursëd
Eve from then till now. “I will greatly multiply thy sorrow!” And
sorrow has been multiplied to such an aggravated and barbarous extent
upon her unfortunate head, that in the Jewish ritual to this very
day there is a part of the service wherein the men, standing in the
presence of women, individually say: “Blessed art thou, O Lord our God,
King of the universe, who hast not made me a woman!” thus deliberately
insulting, in their very house of worship, the sex of their mothers!

But from the earliest times, if we are to accept historical testimony,
the Jews of the ancient world appear to have treated women in the
majority as “Something worser than their dog, a little lower than
their horse.” Save and except those rare cases where the Jewish woman
suddenly found out her latent powers and employed them to advantage,
the Jewish man made her fetch and carry for him like a veritable beast
of burden. He yoked her to his plough with oxen,--he sold and exchanged
her with his friends as freely as any other article of commerce,--his
“base uses” of her were various, and seldom to his credit,--while, such
as they were, they only lasted so long as they satisfied his immediate
humour. When done with, she was “cast out.” The kind of “casting out”
to which she was subjected is not always explained. But it may be taken
for granted that in many instances she was either killed immediately,
or turned adrift to die of starvation and weariness. The Jews in their
Biblical days were evidently not much affected by her griefs. They were
God’s “chosen” people,--and the fact that women were the mothers of the
whole “chosen” race, appeared to call for no claim on their chivalrous
tenderness or consideration.

Looking back through the vista of time to that fabled Eden, when
she listened to the tempting of the “subtil” one, the wrongs and
injustices endured by Accursëd Eve at the hand of Coward Adam make up
a calendar of appalling, almost superhuman crime. Man has taken the
full licence allowed him by the old Genesis story (which, by the way,
was evidently invented by man himself for his own convenience). “Thy
desire shall be to thy husband and he shall rule over thee.” And among
all tribes, and in all nations he _has_ ruled with a rod of iron! The
Christian dispensation has interfered somewhat with his former reign of
tyranny, for with the birth of Christ came, to a certain extent, the
idealization and beatification of womanhood. The Greeks and Romans,
however, had a latent glimmering idea of what Woman in all her glory
should be, and of what she might possibly attain to in the future,--for
all their grandest symbols of life, such as Truth, Beauty, Justice,
Fortune, Fame, Wisdom, are always represented by their sculptors
clothed in the female form divine. It is a curious fact, that in those
early periods of civilization, when Literature and Art were just
dawning upon the world, man, though aggregating to his own Ego nearly
everything in the universe, paused before representing himself as a
figure of Justice, Mercy or Wisdom. He evidently realized his unfitness
to stand, even in marble, before the world as a symbol of moral virtue.
He therefore, with a grace which well became him in those “pagan” days,
bent the knee to all noble attributes of humanity as represented in
Woman. Her fair face, her beauteous figure, greeted him in all his
temples of worship;--as Venus and Diana she smiled upon him; as the
goddess of Fortune or Chance, she accepted his votive wreaths,--as
Fame or Victory, she gave him blessing whenever he went to war, or
returned in triumph from the field;--and all this was but the embryo
or shadowing-forth of woman’s higher future and better possibilities,
when the days of her long and cruel probation should be accomplished,
and her “curse” in part be lifted. There are signs and tokens that
this happy end is in sight. Accursëd Eve is beginning to have a good
time. And the only fear now is, lest she should overstep the mark of
her well-deserved liberty and run headlong into licence. For Eve,--with
or without curse,--is naturally impulsive and credulous; and being too
often forgetful of the little incident which occurred to her in the
matter of the Tree of Good and Evil, is still far too prone to listen
to the beguiling of “subtil” personages worse “than any beast of the
field which the Lord hath made.”

Accursëd Eve, having broken several of her old-time fetters, and
beginning to feel her feet as well as her wings, just now wants a
word in politics. As one of her cursëd daughters, I confess I wonder
that she should wish to put herself to so much unnecessary trouble,
seeing that she has the whole game in her hands. Politics are generally
hustled along by Coward Adam,--unless, by rarest chance, Brave Adam,
his twin brother, suddenly steps forth unexpectedly, when there ensues
what is called a “collapse of the Government.” In any question, small
or great, Accursëd Eve has only to offer Coward Adam the apple, and he
will eat it. Which metaphor implies that even in politics, if she only
moves him round gradually to her own views in that essentially womanly
way which, while persuading, seems not to persuade, he is bound to
yield. Personally speaking, I do not know any man who is not absolutely
under the thumb of at least one woman. And I will not believe that
there is any woman so feeble, so stupid, so lost to the power and charm
of her own individuality, as not to be able to influence quite half
a dozen men. This being the case, what does Accursëd Eve want with a
vote? If she is so unhappy, so ugly, so repulsive, so deformed in mind
and manners as to have no influence at all on any creature of the male
sex whatever, neither father, nor brother, nor uncle, nor cousin, nor
lover, nor husband, nor friend,--would the opinion of such an one be of
any consequence, or her vote of any value? I assert nothing,--I only
ask the question.

Speaking personally as a woman, I have no politics, and want none. I
only want the British Empire to be first and foremost in everything,
and I tender my sincerest homage to all the men of every party who will
honestly work towards that end. These being my sentiments, I deprecate
any strong separate parliamentary attitude on the part of Accursëd Eve.
I say that she has much better, wider work to do than take part in
tow-rows with the rather undignified personages who often make somewhat
of a bear-garden of the British House of Commons. That she would prove
a good M.P. were she a man, I am quite sure; but as a woman I know she
“goes one better,” in becoming the wife of an M.P.

Accursëd Eve! Mother of the world! What higher thing does she seek?
Mother of Christianity itself, she stands before us, a figure symbolic
of all good, her Holy Child in her arms, her sweet, musing, prayerful
face bending over it in gravely tender devotion. From her soft breast
humanity springs renewed,--she represents the youth, the hope, the
love of all mankind. Wronged as she has been, and as she still is,
her patience never fails. Deceived, she “mends her broken shell with
pearl,” and still trusts on. Her sweet credulousness is the same as
ever it was;--the “subtil” one can always over-reach her through her
too ready confidence in the idea that “all things work together for
good.” Her “curse” is the crime of loving too well,--believing too
much. Should a “subtil” one say he loves her, she honestly thinks he
does. When he turns out, as often happens, to be looking after her
money rather than herself, she can scarcely force her mind to realize
that he is not so much hero as cad. When she has to earn her own living
in any of the artistic professions, she will frequently tell all her
plans, hopes and ambitions to “subtil” ones with the most engaging
frankness. The “subtil” ones naturally take every advantage of her, and
some of them put a stopgap on her efforts if they can.

How many times men have tried to steal away the honour of a woman’s
name and fame in literature need not here be chronicled. Of how many
books, bearing a woman’s name on the title-page it is said--“Her
husband helped her,”--or “She got Mr. So-and-So to write the
descriptive part!” “George Eliot” has often been accused of being
assisted in her novels by Mr. Lewes. A little incident,--touching
enough to my mind,--is related in the memoirs of Charlotte Brontë.
After her marriage, and when she was expecting the birth of her
child, she was reading some of the first chapters of an intended new
novel to her husband,--who, as he listened, said in that peculiarly
encouraging way which is common to men who have gifted women to deal
with--“You seem to be repeating yourself. You must take care not to
repeat yourself.” Poor little soul! She never “repeated” herself,--she
just died. No one can tell how her husband’s thoughtless phrase may
have teazed or perplexed her sensitive mind in a critical condition of
health, and helped to hasten the fatal end.

Edward Fitzgerald’s celebrity as a scholar is not, and never will be
wide enough to blot out from remembrance his brutal phrase on hearing
of the death of Elizabeth Barrett Browning--

“Mrs. Browning is dead. Thank God we shall have no more Aurora Leighs!”

While, far more creditable to Algernon Charles Swinburne than his own
praise of himself now unfortunately affixed to the newly collected
edition of his works, is the praise he bestows on this noble
woman-genius in his preface to her great poem. I quote one line of it
here--

“No English contemporary poet by profession has left us work so full of
living fire.”

For once, and in this particular instance, Accursëd Eve in literature
has, in such a verdict, won her merited literary honours.

But as a rule honours are withheld from her, and the laurel is filched
from her brows by Coward Adam ere she has time to wear it. One flagrant
case is well known, of a man who having lived entirely on a woman’s
literary earnings for years, went about in the clothes her pen had
paid for, among the persons to whom, through her influence, he had
been introduced, boasting that he assisted her to write the greater
part of her books. To their shame be it said, a great many people
believed him; and not till he was dead, and the woman went on writing
her books as before, did they even begin to see the wrong they had
done her. They would not have dared to calumniate the false boaster as
they calumniated the innocent hard worker. The boaster was a man,--the
worker was a woman;--therefore the dishonour of passing off literary
work not one’s own, must, so they imagined, naturally belong to
Accursëd Eve,--not to Coward Adam! Of their humiliation when the real
truth was known, history sayeth nothing.

Yet with all the weight of her curse more or less upon her, and with
all her sorrows, shattered ideals, wrecked hopes, and lost loves,
Accursëd Eve is still the most beautiful, the most perfect figure in
creation. Her failings, her vanities, her weaknesses, her sins, arise
in the first place from love--even if afterwards, through Coward Adam’s
ready encouragement, they degenerate into vice and animalism. Her first
impulse in earliest youth is a desire to please Adam,--the same impulse
precisely which led her to offer him the forbidden apple in the first
days of their mutual acquaintance. She wishes to charm him,--to win his
heart,--to endear herself to him in a thousand tender ways,--to wind
herself irretrievably round his life. If she succeeds in this aim, she
is invariably happy and virtuous. But if she is made to feel that she
cannot hold him on whom her thoughts are centred,--if his professed
love for her only proves weak and false when put to trial,--if he
finds it easy to forget both sentiment and courtesy, and is quick to
add insult to injury, then all the finer and more delicate emotions
of her nature become warped and unstrung,--and though she endures her
suffering because she must, she resents it and takes vengeance when she
can. Of resentfulness against wrong and revenge for injustice, come
what are called “bad women.” Yet I would humbly venture to maintain
that even these “bad” were not bad in the first instance. They were
born in the usual way, with the usual Eve impulse,--the desire to
please, not themselves, but the opposite sex. If their instinctive
efforts have been met with cruelty, oppression, neglect, desertion and
sometimes the most heartless and cowardly betrayal, they can scarcely
be blamed if they play the same tricks on the unloving, disloyal churls
for whom they have perhaps sacrificed the best part of their lives.
For innocent faith and trusting love _are_ the best part of every
woman’s life; and when these are destroyed by the brutalizing touch of
some Coward Adam, the woman may well claim compensation for her soul’s
murder.

Accursëd Eve! Still she loves,--to find herself fooled and cheated;
still she hopes, even while hope eludes her,--still she waits, for
what she may never win,--still she prays prayers that may never be
answered,--still she bears and rears the men of the future, wondering
perchance whether any of them will ever help to do her justice,--will
ever place her where she should be, as the acknowledged queenly
“help-meet” of her stronger, but less enduring partner! Beautiful,
frail, trusting, loving, Accursëd Eve! She bends beneath the
curse,--but the clouds are lifting!--there is light in the sky of
her future dawn! And it may be that a worse malediction than the one
pronounced in Eden, will fall on those who make her burden of life
heavier to bear!




“IMAGINARY” LOVE

                   My love
     Is as the very centre of the earth
     Drawing all things to it.
                      --_Troilus and Cressida._


There is perhaps no emotion more elevating or more deceptive than that
sudden uplifting of the heart and yearning of the senses which may be
called “imaginary” Love. It resembles the stirring of the sap in the
roots of flowers, thrilling the very ground with hints and promises of
spring,--it is the unspeakable outcoming of human emotion and sympathy
too great to be contained within itself,--the tremulous desire,--half
vague and wholly innocent,--of the human soul for its mate. The lower
grades of passion have not as yet ruffled the quivering white wings
of this divinely sweet emotion, and the being who is happy enough to
experience it in all its intensity, is, for the time, the most enviable
on earth. Youth or maiden, whichever it be, the world is a fairyland
for this chosen dreamer. Nothing appears base or mean,--God’s smile
is reflected in every ray of sunshine, and Nature offers no prospect
that is not pleasing. It is the season of glamour and grammarye,--a
look over the distant hills is sufficient to engage the mind of the
dreaming girl with brilliant fancies of gallant knights riding from
far-off countries, with their lady’s colours pinned to their breasts
“to do or die” for the sake of love and glory,--and the young boy, half
in love with a pretty face he has seen on his way home from school or
college, begins to think with all the poets, of eyes blue as skies,
of loves and doves, and hearts and darts, in happy unconsciousness
that his thoughts are not in the least original. Yet with all its
ethereal beauty and gossamer-sense of pleasure, this “imaginary”
love is often the most pathetic experience we have or ever shall
have in life. It is answerable for numberless griefs,--for bitter
disillusions,--occasionally, too, for broken hearts. It glitters
before us, a brilliant chimera, during our very young days,--and on
our entrance into society it vanishes, leaving us to pursue it through
many phases of existence, and always in vain. The poet is perhaps
the happiest of all who join in this persistent chase after the
impossible,--for he frequently continues to imagine “imaginary” love
with ecstasy and fervour to the very end of his days. Next in order
comes the musician, who in the composition of a melancholy nocturne
or tender ballad, or in the still greater work of a romantic opera,
imagines “imaginary” love in strains of perfect sound, which waken
in the hearts of his hearers all the old feverish longings, all the
dear youthful dreams, all the delicious romances which accompanied the
lovely white-winged Sentiment in days past and dead for ever. Strange
to say, it often happens that the musician, while thus appeasing his
own insatiable thirst for “imaginary” love, is frequently aware that
he is arousing it in others; and could he probe to the very fibres of
his thinking soul, he would confess to a certain keen satisfaction in
the fact of his being able to revivify the old restless yearning of a
pain which is sweeter to the lonely soul than pleasure.

Now this expression of the “lonely soul” is used advisedly, because,
in sad truth, every human soul is lonely. Lonely at birth,--still more
lonely at death. During its progress through life it gathers around
it what it can in the way of crumbs of love, grains of affection,
taking them tenderly and with tears of gratefulness. But it is always
conscious of solitude,--an awful yet Divine solitude over which the
Infinite broods, watchful yet silent. Why it is brought into conscious
being, to live within a material frame and there perform certain duties
and labours, and from thence depart again, it cannot tell. All is a
mystery,--a strange Necessity, in which it cannot truly recognize
its part or place. Yet it is,--and one of the strongest proofs of
its separate identity from the body is this “imaginary” love for
which it yearns, and which it never obtains. “Imaginary” love is not
earthly,--neither is it heavenly,--it is something between both, a
vague and inchoate feeling, which, though incapable of being reduced
to any sort of reason or logic, is the foundation of perhaps all the
greatest art, music and poetry in the world. If we had to do merely
with men as they are, and women as they are, Art would perish utterly
from the face of the earth. It is because we make for ourselves
“ideal” men, “ideal” women, and endow these fair creations with the
sentiment of “imaginary” love, that we still are able to communicate
with the gods. Not yet have we lowered ourselves to the level of the
beasts,--nor shall we do so, though things sometimes seem tending that
way. Realism and Atheism have darkened the world, as they darken it
now, long before the present time, and as defacements on the grandeur
of the Universe they have not been permitted to remain. Nor will they
be permitted now,--the reaction will, and must inevitably set in. The
repulsive materialism of Zola, and others of his school,--the loose
theories of the “smart” set, and the moral degradation of those who
have no greater God than self,--these things are the merest ephemera,
destined to leave no more mark on human history than the trail of a
slug on one leaf of an oak. The Ideal must always be triumphant,--the
soul can only hope to make way by climbing towards it. Thus it is with
“imaginary” Love,--it must hold fast to its ideal, or be content to
perish on the plane of sensual passion, which exhausts itself rapidly,
and once dead, is dead for ever and aye.

With all its folly, sweetness, piteousness and pathos, “imaginary” love
is the keynote of Art,--its fool-musings take shape in exquisite verse,
in tales of romance and adventure, in pictures that bring the nations
together to stand and marvel, in music that makes the strong man weep.
It is the most supersensual of all delicate sensations,--as fine as a
hair, as easily destroyed as a gnat’s wing!--a rough touch will wound
it,--a coarse word will kill it,--the sneer of the Realist shuts it in
a coffin of lead and sinks it fathoms deep in the waters of despair.
Strange and cruel as the fact may seem, Marriage appears to put an end
to it altogether.


     Think you, if Laura had been Petrarch’s wife
     He would have written sonnets to her all his life?


inquires Byron. He certainly would not. The “imaginary” love of
Petrarch was the source of his poetic inspiration; if he had ever
dragged it down to the level of the commonplace Actual, he would have
killed his Muse. In a similar way the love of Dante for Beatrice was
of the “imaginary” quality. Those who read the “Vita Nuova” will
scarcely fail to see how the great poet hugs his love-fancies and
feeds himself with delicious extravagances in the way of idealized
and sublimated soul-passion. He dissects every fine hair of a stray
emotion, and writes a sonnet on every passing heart-beat. Dante’s wife
never became so transfigured in her husband’s love. Why? Alas, who can
say! No reason can be given save that perchance “familiarity breeds
contempt,” and that the Unattainable seems always more beautiful than
the Attained. The delight of possession would appear to be as brief as
the flowering of a rose. Lovers are in haste to wed,--but when the knot
is once irrevocably tied, in nine cases out of ten they wish it could
be untied again. They no longer imagine “imaginary” love! The glamour
is gone. Illusions are all over. The woman is no longer the removed,
the fair, the chaste, the unreachable,--the man ceases to be the proud,
the strong hero endowed with the attributes of the gods. “Imaginary”
love then resolves itself into one of two things,--a firm, every-day,
close and tender _friendship_, or else a sick disappointment, often
ending in utter disgust. But the divine emotion of “imaginary” love
has died,--the Soul is no longer enamoured of its Ideal--and the
delicate psychic passion which inspires the poet, the painter, the
musician, turns at once to fresh objects of admiration and pursuit. For
it is never exhausted,--unlike any purely earthly sense it knows no
satiety. Deceived in one direction, it dies in another. Dissatisfied
with worldly things, it extends its longing heavenwards,--there at
least it shall find what it seeks,--not now, but hereafter! Age does
not blunt this fine emotion, for, as may often be remarked with some
beautiful souls in the decline of bodily life, the resigning of earthly
enjoyments gives them no pain,--and the sweet placidity of expectation,
rather than the dull apathy of regret, is their chief characteristic.
“Imaginary” love still beckons them on;--what has not been found Here
will be found There!

Happy, and always to be envied, are those who treasure this aerial
sentiment of the spiritual brain! It is the dearest possession of
every true artist. In every thought, in every creative work or plan,
“imaginary” love goes before, pointing out wonders unseen by less
enlightened eyes,--hiding things unsightly, disclosing things lovely,
and making the world fair to the mind in all seasons, whether of storm
or calm. Intensifying every enjoyment, adding a double thrill to the
notes of a sweet song, lending an extra glow to the sunshine, an added
radiance to the witchery of the moonlight, a more varied and exquisite
colouring to the trees and flowers, a charm to every book, a delight
to every new scene, “imaginary” love, a very sprite of enchantment,
helps us to believe persistently in good, when those who love not at
all, neither in reality nor in idealization, are drowning in the black
waters of suicidal despair.

So it is well for us--those who can--to imagine “imaginary” love! We
shall never grasp the Dream in this world--nevertheless let us fly
after it as though it were a Reality! Its path is one of sweetness more
than pain,--its ways are devious, yet even in sadness still entrancing.
Better than rank, better than wealth is this talisman, which with a
touch brings us into close communication with the Higher worlds. Let
us “imagine” our friends are true; let us “imagine” we are loved for
our own sakes alone,--let us “imagine,” as we welcome our acquaintances
into our homes, that their smiles and greetings are sincere--let us
imagine “imaginary” love as the poets do,--a passion tender, strong
and changeless--and pursue it always, even if the objects, which for a
moment its passing wings have brushed, crumble into dust beneath that
touch of fire! So shall our lives retain the charm of constant Youth
and Hope,--so shall the world seem always beautiful to us,--so shall
the Unimaginable glory of the future Real-in-Love shine nearer every
day in our faithful, fond pursuit of its flying Shadow!




THE ADVANCE OF WOMAN

     Follow Light and do the Right--for man can half control his doom--
     Till you find the deathless Angel seated in the vacant tomb!
                       --TENNYSON, _Locksley Hall, Sixty Years After_.


Sixty years ago! To us of the present day it seems a very long time--a
kind of “dark ages” period wherein we peer backward dubiously,
wondering what everybody was like then. History, taking us by the hand,
shows us, as in a magic glass, the Coronation of Victoria, one of the
best Queens that the world has ever known, and tells us of the great
men and masterly intellects of that past time, whose immortal works we
still have with us, but whose mere mortal place knows them no more.
Much may be seen in the backward glimpse that some of us may possibly
regret and wish that we possessed again. Men of power and dominance,
for example--great writers, great thinkers, great reformers--surely we
lack these! Surely we need them sorely! But it seems to be a rule of
Nature that if we gain in one direction we must lose in another, and
whatever we have lost in that far-gone period, we have certainly gained
much in the forward direction. One of the most remarkable changes,
perhaps, that has taken place in the passing of the years is the
different position assigned to Woman from that which she occupied when
Dickens and Thackeray wrote their wonderful novels, and when Charlotte
Brontë astonished the world by her woman’s genius, to be followed by
the still more powerful and Scott-like display of brainpower in Mary
Ann Evans (“George Eliot”). At that time men were still chivalrous.
Woman was so rarely brilliant--or, shall we put it, she so rarely had
the chance of asserting the brilliant qualities that are her natural
endowment--that man was content to acknowledge any unusual talent
on her part as an abnormal quality, infrequent enough to be safely
admired. In this spirit, more or less, Sir Walter Scott paid tribute
to Jane Austen, and Thackeray to Charlotte Brontë; but as time has
progressed, and women have arisen one after another in the various
departments of Art and Literature, men have begun to fall back and look
askance, and somewhat threateningly, on the fair trespassers in their
hitherto guarded domains. And the falling back and the looking askance
continue in exact proportion to the swift and steady onward march of
the white-robed Amazons into the Battle of Life. Braced with the golden
shield of Courage, helmeted with Patience, and armed with the sword of
Faith, the women-warriors are taking the field, and are to be seen now
in massed ranks, daily marshalling themselves in more compact order,
firm-footed and fearless, prepared to fight for intellectual freedom,
and die rather than yield. They, too, will earn the right to live;
they, too, will be something greater than the mere vessels of man’s
desire--whether maids, wives, or mothers, they will prove themselves
worthy to be all these three, and more than these, to the very utmost
extent of their moral and intellectual being!

Perhaps there is nothing more entertaining to the wit of a cultured and
intelligent woman than the recurrent piping wail of man’s assertion
that “woman has no creative power.” Her place, says the didactic
male, is the kitchen, the nursery, and beside the cradle. _Certes_,
she can manage these three departments infinitely better than he can,
especially the cradle part of it, wherein his fractious disposition
is generally well displayed the moment he starts in life. But, as a
matter of fact, there is hardly any vocation in which she cannot,
if she puts her mind to it, distinguish herself just as easily and
successfully as he can if he will only kindly stand out of her way.
He makes himself ludicrous by persistently “crying her down” when all
the world _en masse_ beholds her taking the highest University honours
over his head, and beating him intellectually on his own ground. In
physical force he certainly outstrips her. Item,--he can kick her as
heartily and skilfully as he can kick a football, _vide_ the daily
police reports. Item,--he can eat and drink much more than she can,
because he devotes a great deal more time and attention to the study
of gastronomy. Item,--he can smoke more. Item,--he can indulge freely
in unbridled licentiousness, and amply prove his original savage right
to be considered a polygamous animal, without being banned from “good
society,” or anything being said against his moral character. This
a woman cannot do. If she has many lovers, her conduct is severely
criticized. But if she has none, she is still more bitterly condemned,
especially if she happens to be in the least good-looking. And why?
Simply because her indifference “reflects” on the male sex generally.
The ugliest of masculine creatures experiences a vague sense of offence
when he meets a charming woman who neither seeks his advice nor his
company. And here we have the gist of the whole matter: man is a vain
animal and wants to be admired. Like the peacock, he struts forward
and spreads out his glittering tail. The central feature of the
landscape, as he considers himself, he waits for the pea-hen to worship
him. If, instead of the humble pea-hen, he finds another sort of bird
entirely--with not only a tail as brilliant as his own, but wings which
will carry it over his head, he is mightily incensed, and his shrill
cry of rage echoes through that particular part of the universe where
he is no longer “monarch of all he surveys.” His “other world” must be
pea-hens or none!

And yet Man’s delightful and utter want of the commonest logic is never
more flagrantly exhibited than in this vital matter of his estimate
of Woman, taking it all round in a broad sense. Daily, hourly, in the
household and in the market-place, he may be heard cheapening her
abilities, sneering at such triumphs as she attains, cracking stale
jests at her “love of gossip,” “love of dress” (for he is seldom
original even in a joke), and her “incessant tongue,” blissfully
ignoring the fact that his own is wagging all the time; and yet no
one can twist him so limply and helplessly round the littlest of her
little fingers as she can. Moreover, throughout all the ages, so far as
the keenest explorer or historical student can discover, his highest
ideals of life have been depicted in the Feminine form. Fortune, Fame,
Justice, the Arts and Sciences, are all represented by female figures
lovingly designed by male hands. Evidently conscious in himself that
a woman’s purity, honesty, fidelity, and courage are nobler types of
these virtues than his own, Man apparently is never weary of idealizing
them as Woman womanly. Thoroughly aware of the supreme sovereignty
Woman can exercise whenever he gives her the chance, he, while
endeavouring to bind and hold her intellectual forces by his various
edicts and customs, takes ever an incongruous satisfaction in doing
her full justice by the magnitude of his feminine ideals. The divine
spirit of Nature itself, called “Egeria,” is always depicted by man as
a woman. Faith, Hope and Charity, are represented as female spirits,
as are the Three Graces. The Muses are women; so are the Fates. Hence,
as all the virtues, morals, arts, and sciences are shown by the
highest masculine skill as wearing woman’s form and possessing woman’s
attributes, it is easy to see that man has always been perfectly aware
in his inward intelligence of Woman’s true worth and right place in
creation, though, by such laws as he has made for his own better
convenience, he has put up whatever barriers he can in the way of the
too swift advancement of so superior and victorious a creature. Now
that she is beginning to take an important share in the world’s work
and progress, he is becoming vaguely alarmed. In each art, in each
profession he sees her gaining step by step to higher intellectual
dominance. He watches her move from plane to plane of study, learning,
as she goes, that the mere animalism of unthinking subservience to his
passions is not her only heritage. And straightway the long-spoilt
child begins to whimper. “A woman has no creative power!” he cries. “No
imagination!--no originality!--no force of character! What she does in
the Arts is so very little----!”

Stop, oh Man! You have had a very long, long innings, remember! From
the time of Abraham, and ages before that worthy patriarch ever turned
Hagar out into the wilderness, you have been setting Woman alongside
your cattle, and curling your whip with a magnificent carelessness
round both at your pleasure, yea! even offering both with indifferent
readiness for sale and barter. You have enjoyed centuries of liberty;
it is now woman’s turn to taste the sweets of freedom. She does very
little in the Arts, you say? I grant you that in the first of them,
Poetry, she does little indeed. I do not think we shall ever have a
female Shakespeare, for instance. But, at the same time, I equally do
not think we shall ever again have a male one! Yet it is to be admitted
that none of the leading women poets can compare for an instant with
the leading men in that most divine and primæval of Arts. But I should
not like to assert that the great woman-Dante or woman-Shelley may not
yet arise, for it is to be borne in mind that woman’s education and
woman’s chances have only just begun. In Music, again, she is deemed
deficient. Yet we are confronted at the present day by the fact that
many of the most successful and charming of song writers are women.
And the following appears in the Dresden _Neueste Nachricten_ (October
18, 1902):--

“Up to the present date we have always entertained the opinion that
the composition of music was a gift denied to the female sex, elegant
trifles (as exceptions) only confirming our doubts. And now an English
lady appears on the scene, amazing the musical world of Dresden. She
was as a young girl already a distinguished artist, a virtuoso on
the piano, and played--as ‘Miss Bright,’--under the direction of Dr.
Wullner, a piano concerto of her own composition, with extraordinary
success. Then marriage separated her from her art for several years.
Now (after the death of her husband), the young widow, Mrs. Knatchbull,
has composed an opera--text, music, and instrumentation all being her
own work--and has brought it with her to Dresden. The music is so
captivating, and above all, holds one so strongly that one exclaims
in astonishment, ‘Can this be the work of a woman?’ It is more than
probable that the opera will be produced at the Dresden Opera House.”

Here followeth an instructive story:--A recent opera performed with
considerable success at Monte Carlo and other Continental resorts
is the work of a woman, stolen by a man. The facts are well known,
as are the names of the hero and heroine of the sordid tragedy. A
little love-making on the part of the male composer, who could show
nothing of ability save the composition of a few amorous drawing-room
songs--a confiding trust on the part of the woman-genius, whose brain
was full of God-given melody--these were the motives of the drama.
She played the score of her opera through to him--he listened with
admiration--with words of tender flattery, precious to her who was
weak enough to care for such a rascal; and then he took it away to be
“transcribed,” as he said, and set out for the orchestra. He loved
her, so the poor credulous soul thought!--and she trusted him--such
an old story! He copied her opera in his own manuscript--stole it, in
short, and left for the Continent, where he had it produced as his own
composition. Had she complained, the law would have gone against her.
She had no proof save that of her love. Before a grinning, jesting
court of law she would have had to publish the secret of her heart.
People would have shaken their heads and said, “Poor thing! A case
of self-delusion and hysteria!” He himself would have shaken his
dirty pate and said, “Poor soul! Mad--quite mad! Many women have had
their heads turned likewise for love of me!” So it chances that only
those “in the know” are aware of the story, and the man-Fraud is left
unmolested; but it is a curious and suggestive fact that he produces no
more operas.

There is one thing that women generally, in the struggle for
intellectual free life, should always remember--one that they are
too often apt to forget--namely, that the Laws, as they at present
exist, are made _by_ men, _for_ men. There are no really stringent
laws for the protection of women’s interests except the Married
Woman’s Property Act, which is a great and needful boon. But take the
following instances of the eccentricities of English law, both of
which have come under my own knowledge as having occurred to personal
friends. A certain foreign nobleman residing in England made a will
leaving all his fortune to his mistress. His legitimate children were
advised to dispute the will, as under the law of his native country
he could not dispossess his lawful heirs of their inheritance. He had
not naturalized himself at any time as a British subject, and the
plain proof of this was, that but a year before his death, he had
applied to the Government of his own country for permission to wear
a certain decoration, which permission was accorded him. The nature
of his application proved that he still considered himself a subject
of his own native land. The case came before an English judge, who
had apparently eaten some very indigestible matter for his luncheon.
With an apoplectic countenance and an injured demeanour, the learned
gentleman declined to go into any of the details of the case, and
administered “justice” by deciding the whole thing on “a question of
domicile”--namely, that as the man had lived in England twenty-five
years, he was, naturalized or unnaturalized, a British subject and
could make his will as he liked. The fortune was, therefore, handed
over to his mistress, and the legal wife and legitimately-born children
were left out in the cold! Another case is that of a lady, well-born
and well-educated, who married a man with a fortune of some twenty
thousand a year. After the expiration of about fifteen years, when she
had borne her husband three children, he suddenly took a fantastic
dislike to her, and an equally fantastic liking for a chorus girl.
He promptly sought a divorce. As there was no ground for divorce,
he failed to obtain it. He, therefore, adopted a course of action
emanating entirely from his own brilliant brain. Starting for a cruise
on board his yacht, in company with the bewildering chorus girl,
he left orders with his solicitor to have the whole of his house
dismantled of its furniture and “cleared.” This was promptly done, the
wife and children being left without so much as a bed to lie upon, or a
chair to sit upon. The unfortunate lady told her story to a court, and
applied for “maintenance.” This, of course, the recalcitrant husband
was forced to pay, but the sum was cut down to the smallest possible
amount, under the supervision of the blandly approving court, with the
result that this man’s wife, accustomed from her girlhood to every home
comfort and care, now lives with her children in a condition of genteel
penury more degrading than absolute poverty. _There is no remedy for
these things._ One welcomes heartily the idea of women lawyers, in
the hope that when their keen, quick brains learn to grasp the huge,
unwieldy, and complex machinery of the muddle called Legal Justice,
they may, perhaps, be able to effect some reforms on behalf of their
own sex. As matters at present stand, the unbridled and extravagant
licentiousness of men, and the consequent degradation of women, are
_protected_ by law. Even a fraudulent financial concern is so guarded
by “legal” advice that it would take the lifetime’s earning of an
honest man to bring about any exposure. We want women-lawyers--Portias,
with quick brains, to see the way out of a difficulty into which men
plunge only to flounder more hopelessly. “Can the blind lead the blind?
Shall they not both fall into the ditch?”

In Medicine, women have made more than a decided mark of triumph. It
is almost impossible to over-estimate the priceless value of the work
done by women doctors and women surgeons in the harems of India and
Turkey, where the selfishness and jealousy of the Eastern sybarite
would give his women over to cruel agonies of disease and death, rather
than suffer them to be so much as looked upon by another of his own
sex. Yet, though perfectly conscious that Woman’s work in this branch
of science is day by day becoming more and more precious to suffering
humanity, we have quite recently been confronted by the spectacle of
a number of men deciding to resign their appointments at a certain
hospital, rather than suffer a woman to be nominated house-surgeon.
Her skill and efficiency were as great as theirs, and she had all the
qualifications necessary for the post; but no! sooner than honour a
woman’s ability, they preferred to resign. Comment on this incident
is needless, but it is one of the straws that show which way the wind
blows.

Much excellent work is done, and remains yet to be done by women, as
inspectors of schools. They alone are really fitted for the task of
ascertaining the conditions under which children are made to study,
and they are not likely, while examining infant classes, to make such
ponderous statements as that passed by a certain male inspector, who,
according to an amusing story told me by Sir John Gorst, found the
babies (not above five years old) “deplorably deficient in mental
arithmetic!” It takes a man to deplore “lack of mental arithmetic” in
a baby. A woman would never be capable of such weighty stupidity.
Perhaps it will be just as well to glance casually at the state of
things in this country respecting the education of mere infants, as
arranged by certain laws drawn up by men, laws in which women, who are
the mothers of the race, are not allowed to have a voice.

1. The law _allows_ them to enter at three years old, and _compels_
them to enter at five years old.

2. Men inspectors constantly examine children of four years old
in arithmetic, and the “mental arithmetic of the baby class,” is
constantly mentioned in reports.

3. Needlework is taught before five years old; two to three hours form
the staple instruction. Needlework injures the eyesight at such a
tender age, and two or three hours are a cruelty and a waste of time
for tiny children.

4. Desks, blackboards, slates and books are everywhere in excess of
“Kindergarten” occupations, and the “development of the spontaneous
activity in the child” is twisted into the development of uniformity.
To differ from the usual is to be naughty; every one must do the same
thing at the same time. Every one must build a like house, a like
table, a like chair; each brick must be on the table at the same minute.

5. Despite male inspectors, the babies sleep. They fall off their
seats and bump their foreheads against the desks, and their spines are
twisted and crooked as they lie on their arms, heads forward, upon the
hard supports. Curvature must be produced in many cases, solely from
these causes.

6. To maintain order, corporal punishment is habitual, and “fear”
the chief motive for right-doing. To quote from a letter of Sir John
Gorst’s:--

“The reform of this system is not a matter of sentiment. These babies
are the future scholars of our improved schools that the Education Act
is intended to produce, and the future citizens by whom our Imperial
position is to be maintained. If we prematurely addle their intellects
by schooling--for which their tender years are unfit; if we cripple
their bodies by cooping them up in deforming desks; if we destroy their
sight by premature needlework, and confuse their senses by over-study
of subjects which they are too young to understand, we shall neither
have fit scholars for our future schools, nor fit citizens to uphold
the Empire.”

Starting on these premises it will surely be acknowledged that women
have an indisputable right to be inspectors of schools. They have the
natural instinct to know what is best for the health and well-being
of children, and they are also capable of correctly judging by that
maternal sympathy which is their inherited gift, how a child’s mental
abilities should best be encouraged and trained.

I have often been asked if I would like to see women in Parliament.
I may say frankly, and at once, that I should detest it. I should
not like to see the sex, pre-eminent for grace and beauty, degraded
by having to witness or to take part in such “scenes” of heated and
undignified disputation as have frequently lowered the prestige of
the House of Commons. On the same lines I may say that I do not care
to see women playing “hockey” or indulging in any purely “tom-boy”
sports and pastimes. They lose “caste” and individuality. One of the
many brilliant and original remarks of mankind concerning the female
sex is that women should be cooks and housekeepers. So they should. No
woman is a good housekeeper unless she understands cooking, nor can she
be a good cook unless she be a good housekeeper. The two things are
inseparable, and combine to make comfort with economy. A woman should
know how to cook and keep house for _herself_, not only for man. Man
says to her: “Be a cook,”--because of all things in the world he loves
a good dinner; loves it better than his wife, inasmuch as he will often
“bully” the wife if the dinner fails. But a woman must also eat, and
she should learn to cook _for her own comfort_, quite apart from his.
In the same way she should study housekeeping. If she lives a single
life, she will find such knowledge eminently useful. But to devote all
her energy and attention to cooking and housekeeping, as most men would
have her do, would be a waste of power and intelligence. As well ask a
great military hero to devote his entire time to the canteen.

In breaking her rusty fetters, and stepping out into the glorious
liberty of the free, Woman has one great thing to remember and to
strive for,--a thing that she is at present, in her newly emancipated
condition, somewhat prone to forget. In claiming and securing
intellectual equality with Man, she should ever bear in mind that such
a position is only to be held by always maintaining and preserving as
great an Unlikeness to him as possible in her life and surroundings.
Let her imitate him in nothing but independence and individuality. Let
her eschew his fashions in dress, his talk and his manners. A woman who
wears “mannish” clothes, smokes cigars, rattles out slang, gambles at
cards, and drinks brandy and soda on the slightest provocation, is lost
altogether, both as woman and man, and becomes sexless. But the woman
whose dress is always becoming and graceful, whose voice is equable and
tender, who enhances whatever beauty she possesses by exquisite manner,
unblemished reputation, and intellectual capacity combined, raises
herself not only to an equality with man, but goes so far above him
that she straightway becomes the Goddess and he the Worshipper. This is
as it should be. Men adore what they cannot imitate. Therefore when men
are drunken, let women be sober; when men are licentious, let women be
chaste; when men are turf-hunters and card-players, let women absent
themselves from both the race-course and the gambling-table; and while
placing a gentle yet firm ban on laxity in morals and disregard of the
binding sanctity of family life, let them silently work on and make
progress in every art, every profession, every useful handicraft, that
they may not be dependent for home or livelihood on man’s merely casual
fancy or idle whim. The mistake of Woman’s progress up to the present,
has been her slavish imitation of Man’s often unadmirable tastes, and
a pathetic “going down” under his lofty disdain. Once grasp the fact
that his disdain is not “lofty” but merely comic, and that his case
is only that of the Distressful Peacock, hurt by indifference to his
tail, things will right themselves. Nature has already endowed Woman
with the contrasting elements of beauty, delicacy, and soft charm, as
opposed to man’s frequent ugliness and roughness; let Woman herself
continue to emphasize the difference by bringing out her original and
individual qualities in all she does or attempts to do. Of course
for a long time yet, Man will declare “feminine individuality” to be
non-existent; but as we know the quality is as plain and patent as
“masculine individuality,” we have only to insist upon it and assert
it, and in due course it will be fully admitted and acknowledged.
Meantime, while pressing on towards the desired goal, Woman must learn
the chief lesson of successful progress, which is, not to copy Man, but
to carefully preserve her beautiful Unlikeness to him in every possible
way, so that, while asserting and gaining intellectual equality with
him, she shall gradually arrive at such ascendancy as to prove herself
ever the finer and the nobler Creature.




THE PALM OF BEAUTY


It would seem, according to the society press, that beauty is a
very common article. Indeed, if we are to accept the innocent
ebullitions of the callow youths who drink beer and play skittles
in the Social-Paragraph line of journalism, and who in their soft
guilelessness are taken in and “used” by certain ladies of a type
resembling Miss Skeggs and Lady Blarney in the _Vicar of Wakefield_,
we are bound to believe that beautiful women are as common as
blackberries, only more so. In the columns devoted by newspaper editors
to the meanderings of those intelligent persons, male and female,
who sign themselves as Onlookers, Observers, Butterflies, Little
Tomtits, and what may be called “I Spys!” generally, one hardly ever
sees the name of a lady without the epithet “beautiful” tacked on to
it, especially if the lady happens to have money. This is curious,
but true. And supposing the so-called Beautiful One has not only
money, commonly speaking, but heaps of money, mines of money, she is
always stated to be “young” as well. The heavier the bullion, the
more assured the youthfulness. If unkind Time shows her to be the
mother of a family where the eldest sprout is some twenty odd years
of age, the complaisant “I Spy” is equal to the occasion and writes
of her thus--“The beautiful Mrs. Juno-Athene brought her eldest
girl, looking more like her sister than her mother.” Whereat Mrs.
Juno-Athene is satisfied,--everybody smiles, and all things are cosy
and comfortable. If any one should dare to say, especially in print,
that Mrs. Juno-Athene is not “beautiful” at all, nor “youthful” in
either looks or bearing, there would be ructions. Somebody would get
into trouble. The “I Spy” might even be dismissed from his or her post
of social paragraphist to the Daily Error. Heaven forbid that such a
catastrophe should happen through the indiscretion of a mere miserable
truth-monger! Let Mrs. Juno-Athene be beautifully and eternally young,
by all means, so long as she can afford to pay for it. The humbug of it
is at any rate kindly and chivalrous, and does nobody any harm, while
it puts money in the purse of the hardworking penster, who is compelled
to deal delicately with these little social matters sometimes, or else
ruminate on a dinner instead of eating it.

Nevertheless, despite the “I Spys,” and the perennial charms of Mrs.
Juno-Athene, beauty is as rare and choice a thing as ever it was in the
days of old when men went mad for it, and Greeks and Trojans fought for
Helen, who, so some historians say, was past forty when her bewitching
fairness set the soul of Troy on fire. A really beautiful woman is
scarcely ever seen, not even in Great Britain, where average good looks
are pleasantly paramount. Prettiness,--the prettiness which is made
up of a good skin, bright eyes, soft and abundant hair, and a supple
figure,--is quite ordinary. It can be seen every day among barmaids,
shop girls, and milliners’ _mannequins_. But Beauty--the divine and
subtle charm which enraptures all beholders,--the perfect form, united
to the perfect face in which pure and noble thought is expressed in
every feature, in every glance of eye, in every smile that makes a
sweet mouth sweeter,--this is what we may search for through all the
Isles of Britain, ay, and through Europe and America and the whole
world besides, and seldom or never find it.

Nine-tenths of the women who are styled “beautiful” by the society
paragraphist, possess merely the average good looks;--the rest are
generally more particularly distinguished by some single and special
trait which may perchance be natural, and may equally be artificial,
such as uncommon-coloured hair (which may be dyed), a brilliant
complexion (which may be put on), or a marvellously “svelte” figure
(which may be the happy result of carefully designed corsets, well
pulled in). Most of the eulogized “beauties” of the Upper Ten to-day,
have, or are able to get, sufficient money or credit supplied to
them for dressing well,--and not only well, but elaborately and
extravagantly, and dress is often the “beauty” instead of the woman.
To judge whether the woman herself is really beautiful without the
modiste’s assistance, it would be necessary to see her deprived of
all her fashionable clothes. Her bought hair should be taken off
and only the natural remainder left. She should be content to stand
_sans_ paint, _sans_ powder, _sans_ back coil, _sans_ corsets, in a
plain white gown, falling from her neck and shoulders to her feet, and
thus cheaply, yet decently clad, submit herself to the gaze of her
male flatterers in full daylight. How many of the “beautiful” Mrs.
Juno-Athenes or the “lovely” Lady Spendthrifts could stand such a test
unflinchingly? Yet the simplest draperies clothe the Greek marbles when
they are clothed at all, and jewels and fripperies on the goddess Diana
would make her grace seem vulgar and her perfection common. Beauty,
real beauty, needs no “creator of costume” to define it, but is, as the
poets say, when unadorned, adorned the most.

Now it is absolutely impossible to meet with any “unadorned” sort
of beauty in those circles of rank and fashion where the society
paragraphist basks at his or her pleasure. On the contrary, there is
so much over-adornment in vogue that it is sometimes difficult to
find the actual true colour and personality of certain ladies whose
charms are daily eulogized by an obliging press. Layers of pearl enamel
picked out with rouge, entirely conceal their human identity. It is
doubtful whether there was ever more face-painting and “faking up” of
beauty than there is now,--never did beauty specialists and beauty
doctors drive such a roaring trade. The profits of beauty-faking are
enormous. Some idea of it may be gained by the fact that there is a
certain shrewd and highly intelligent “doctor” in Paris, who, seeing
which way the wind of fashion blows, brews a harmless little mixture of
rose-water, eau-de-cologne, tincture of benzoin and cochineal, which
materials are quite the reverse of costly, and calling it by a pretty
_sobriquet_, sells the same at twenty-five shillings a bottle! He is
making a fortune out of women’s stupidity, is this good “doctor,” and
who shall blame him? Fools exist merely that the wise may use them.
One has only to read the ladies’ papers, especially the advertisements
therein, to grasp a faint notion of what is being done to spur on the
“beauty” craze. Yet beauty remains as rare and remote as ever, and
often when we see some of the ladies whose “exquisite loveliness”
has been praised for years in nearly every newspaper on this, or the
other side of the Atlantic, we fall back dismayed, with a sense of the
deepest disappointment and aggravation, and wonder what we have done to
be so deceived?

Taken in the majority, the women of Great Britain are supposed to
hold the palm of beauty against all other women of the nations of
the world, and if the word “beauty” be changed to prettiness, the
supposition is no doubt correct. It is somewhat unfortunate, however,
that either through the advice of their dressmakers or their own
erroneous conceptions of Form, they should appear to resent the soft
outlines and gracious curves of nature, for either by the over-excess
of their outdoor sports, or the undue compression of corsets, they are
gradually doing away with their originally intended shapes and becoming
as flat-chested as jockeys under training. No flat-chested woman is
pretty. No woman with large hands, large feet, and the coarse muscular
throat and jaw developed by constant bicycle-riding, can be called
fascinating. The bony and resolute lady whose lines of figure run
straight down without a curve anywhere from head to heel, may possibly
be a good athlete, but her looks are by no means to her advantage.
Men’s hearts are not enthralled or captured by a Something appearing
to be neither man nor woman. And there are a great many of these
Somethings about just now. I am ignorant as to whether American women
go in for mannish sports as frequently and ardently as their British
sisters, but I notice that they have daintier hands and feet, and less
pronounced “muscle.”

At the same time American women on an average, are not so pretty
as British women on the same average. The American complexion is
unfortunate. Often radiant and delicate in earliest youth, it fades
with maturity like a brilliant flower scorched by too hot a sun,
and once departed returns no more. The clear complexion of British
women is their best feature. The natural rose and white skin of an
English, Irish or Scottish girl,--especially a girl born and bred in
the country, is wonderfully fresh and lovely and lasting, and often
accompanies her right through her life to old age. That is, of course,
if she leaves it alone, and is satisfied merely to keep it clean,
without any “adornment” from the beauty doctor. And, though steadily
withholding the divine word “beauty” from the greater portion of the
“beauties” at the Court of King Edward VII. it is unquestionably the
fact that the prettiest women in the world are the British. Americans
are likely to contest this. They will, as indeed in true chivalry they
must, declare that their own “beauties” are best. But one can only
speak from personal experience, and I am bound to say that I have never
seen a pretty American woman pretty enough to beat a pretty British
woman. This, with every possible admission made for the hard-working
society paragraphist, compelled to write of numerous “beautiful”
Ladies So-and-So, and “charming” Mrs. Cashboxes, who, when one comes to
look at them are neither “beautiful” nor “charming” at all.

But British feminine prettiness would be infinitely more captivating
than it is, if it were associated with a little extra additional
touch of vivacity and intelligence. When it is put in the shade, (as
frequently happens,) by the sparkling allurements of the Viennese
coquette, the graceful _savoir faire_ of the French _mondaine_, or
the enticing charm of lustrous-eyed sirens from southern Italy, it
is merely because of its lack of wit. It is a good thing to have a
pretty face; but if the face be only like a wax mask, moveless and
expressionless, it soon ceases to attract. The loveliest picture
would bore us if we had to stare at it dumbly all day. And there is
undeniably a stiffness, a formality, and often a most repellent and
unsympathetic coldness about the British fair sex, which re-acts upon
the men and women of other more warm-hearted and impulsive nations,
in a manner highly disadvantageous to the ladies of our Fortunate
Isles. For it is not _real_ stiffness, or _real_ formality after
all,--nor is it the snowy chill of a touch-me-not chastity, by any
means,--it is merely a most painful, and in many cases, most absurd
self-consciousness. British women are always more or less wondering
what their sister women are thinking about them. They can manage their
men all right; but they put on curious and unbecoming airs directly
other feminine influences than their own come into play. They invite
the comment of the opposite sex, but they dread the criticism of their
own. The awkward girl who sits on the edge of a chair with her feet
scraping the carpet and her hands twiddling uneasily in her lap, is
awkward simply because she has, by some means or other, been made
self-conscious,--and because, in the excess of this self-consciousness
she stupidly imagines every one in the room must be staring at her.
The average London woman, dressed like a fashion-plate, who rustles
in at afternoon tea, with her card-case well in evidence, and her
face carefully set in proper “visiting lines,” offers herself up in
this way as a subject for the satirist, out of the same disfiguring
self-consciousness, which robs her entirely of the indifferent ease
and careless grace which should,--to quote the greatest of American
philosophers, Emerson,--cause her to “repel interference by a decided
and proud choice of influences,” and to “inspire every beholder with
something of her own nobleness.” She is probably not _naturally_
formal,--she is no doubt exceedingly constrained and uncomfortable
in her fashionable attire,--and one may take it for granted that
she would rather be herself than try to be a Something which is a
Nothing. But Custom and Convention are her bogie men, always guarding
her on either side, and investing her too often with such deplorable
self-consciousness that her eye becomes furtive, her mouth hard and
secretive, her conversation inane, and her whole personality an
uncomfortable exhalation of stupidity and dullness.

Nevertheless, setting Custom and Convention apart for the nonce, and
bidding them descend into the shadows of hypocrisy which are their
native atmosphere, the British woman remains the prettiest in the
world. What a galaxy of feminine charms can be gathered under the word
“British”! England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland offer all together such
countless examples of woman’s loveliness, that it would be difficult,
if not impossible, to give the prize for good looks to one portion of
Britain more than to the other. America, so far as her samples have
been, and are, seen in Europe, cannot outrival the “Old Country” in the
prettiness of its women. But it is prettiness only; not Beauty. Beauty
remains intrinsically where it was first born and first admitted into
the annals of Art and Literature. Its home is still in “the Isles of
Greece, where burning Sappho loved and sung.”

Nothing that was ever created in the way of female loveliness can
surpass the beauty of a beautiful Greek woman. True, she is as rare as
a butterfly in a snow storm. True, the women of Athens and of Greece
generally, taken in the rough majority, are not on an average, even
pretty. Nevertheless the palm of beauty remains with them--because
there are always two,--or may be three of them, who dawn year by year
upon the world in all the old perfection of the classic models, and
who may truly be taken for newly-descended goddesses, so faultlessly
formed, so exquisitely featured are they. They are not famed by the
paragraphist, and they probably will never get the chance of moving in
the circles of the British “Upper Ten” or the American “Four Hundred.”
But they are the daughters of Aphrodite still, and hold fast their
heavenly mother’s attributes. It is easy to find a hundred or more
pretty British and American women for one beautiful Greek--but when
found, the beautiful Greek eclipses them all. She is still the wonder
of the world,--the crown of womanly beauty at its best. She shows the
heritage of her race in her regal step and freedom of movement,--in
the lovely curves of her figure, in the classic perfection of her face
with its broad brows, lustrous eyes, arched sweet lips and delicate
contour of chin and throat, and perhaps more than all in the queenly
indifference she bears towards her own loveliness. So,


     Fill high the bowl with Samian wine,
       On Suli’s bank and Parga’s shore,
     Exists the remnant of a line
       Such as the Doric mothers bore;
     And there perhaps some seed is sown
     The Heracleidan blood might own!


And there still, may be found the perfection of womanhood--the one rare
Greek lily, which blossoming at few and far intervals shows in its
exquisite form and colouring what Woman should be at her fairest. To
her, therefore, must be given the Palm of Beauty. But after the lily,
then the rose!--or rather the roses, multitudinous, varied, and always
sweet--of the Fortunate Isles of Britain.




THE MADNESS OF CLOTHES


To dress well is a social duty. Every educated self-respecting woman
is bound to clothe her person as neatly, as tastefully and becomingly
as she can. But just as a virtue when carried to excess develops into
a vice, so the art of dressing well, when allowed to overstep its
legitimate uses and expenditure, easily runs into folly and madness.
The reckless extravagance of women’s dress at the present day is little
short of criminal insanity. A feverish desire to outvie one another in
the manner and make of their garments appears to possess every feminine
creature whose lot in life places her outside positive penury. The
inordinately wealthy, the normally rich, the well-to-do middle class
and the shabby genteel are all equally infected by the same hysterical
frenzy. And it is a frenzy which is humoured and encouraged on all
sides by those who should have the sense, the intelligence and the
foresight to realize the danger of such a tendency, and the misery to
which in many cases it is surely bound to lead.

Latterly there have been certain growlings and mutterings of discontent
from husbands who have had to pay certain unexpectedly long bills for
their wives’ “creations in costume”--but, as a matter of fact, it is
really the men who are chiefly to blame for the wicked waste of money
they afterwards resent and deplore. They are the principal instigators
of the mischief,--the aiders and abettors of the destruction of their
own credit and good name. For they openly show their admiration for
women’s clothes more than for the women clothed,--that is to say,
they are more easily captured by art than by nature. No group of male
flatterers is ever seen round a woman whose dress is un-stylish or
otherwise “out-of-date.” She may have the sweetest face in the world,
the purest nature and the truest heart, but the “dressed” woman, the
dyed, the artistically “faked” woman will nearly always score a triumph
over her so far as masculine appreciation and attention are concerned.

The “faked” woman has everything on her side. The Drama supports her.
The Press encourages her. Whole columns in seemingly sane journals are
devoted to the description of her attire. Very little space is given to
the actual criticism of a new play _as_ a play, but any amount of room
is awarded to glorified “gushers” concerning the actresses’ gowns. Of
course it has to be borne in mind that the “writing up” of actresses’
gowns serves a double purpose. First, the “creators” of the gowns are
advertised, and may in their turn advertise,--which in these days of
multitudinous rival newspapers, is a point not to be lost sight of.
Secondly, the actresses themselves are advertised and certain gentlemen
with big noses who move “behind the scenes,” and are the lineal
descendants of Moses and Aaron, may thereby be encouraged to speculate
in theatrical “shares.” Whereas criticism of the play itself does no
good to anybody nowadays, not even to the dramatic author. For if such
criticism be unfavourable, the public say it is written by a spiteful
enemy,--if eulogistic, by a “friend at court,” and they accept neither
verdict. They go to see the thing for themselves, and if they like it
they keep on going. If not, they stay away, and there’s an end.

But to the gowns there is no end. The gowns, even in an _un_-successful
play, are continuously talked of, continuously written about,
continuously sketched in every sort of pictorial, small and great,
fashionable or merely provincial. And the florid language,--or shall
we say the ‘fine writing’?--used to describe clothes generally, on and
off the stage, is so ravingly sentimental, so bewilderingly turgid,
that it can only compare with the fervid verbosity of the early
eighteenth century romancists, or the biting sarcasm of Thackeray’s
_Book of Snobs_, from which the following passage, descriptive of ‘Miss
Snobky’s’ presentation gown, may be aptly quoted:--

“_Habit de Cour_ composed of a yellow nankeen illusion dress, over a
slip of rich pea-green corduroy, trimmed _en tablier_ with bouquets
of Brussels sprouts, the body and sleeves handsomely trimmed with
calimanco, and festooned with a pink train and white radishes.
Head-dress, carrots and lappets.”

By way of a modern pendant to the above grotesque suggestion, one
extract from a lengthy “clothes” article recently published in a daily
paper will suffice:

“Among the numerous evening and dinner gowns that the young lady has
in her _corbeille_, one, _a l’Impératrice Eugénie_, is very lovely.
The foundation is of white Liberty, with a tulle overdress on which
are four flounces of Chantilly lace arranged in zig-zags, connected
together with shaded pink _gloria_ ribbons arranged in waves and
wreaths. This is repeated on the low corsage and on the long drooping
sleeves of the high bodice.

“A richer toilette is of white Liberty silk, with a flounce of
magnificent Brussels lace festooned by leaves of the chestnut, formed
of white satin wrought in iris beads and silver on white tulle. The
whole gown is strewn with like leaves of graduating sizes, and the
low corsage has a _berthe_ of Brussels lace ornamented with smaller
chestnut leaves as are also the sleeves.” And so on, in unlimited
bursts of enthusiasm.

I cannot say I am in the least sorry when “modistes” who ‘create’
costumes at forty, fifty and even one hundred and two hundred guineas
per gown, are mulcted of some of their unlawful profits by defaulting
creditors. In nine cases out of ten they richly deserve it. They are
rightly punished, when they accept, with fulsome flattery and servile
obsequiousness a “title” as sufficient guarantee for credit, and in
the end find out that Her Grace the Duchess, or Miladi the Countess is
perhaps more wickedly reckless and unprincipled than any plain Miss, or
Mrs. ever born, and that these _grandes dames_ frequently make use of
both rank and position to cheat their tradespeople systematically. The
tradespeople are entirely to blame for trusting them, and this is daily
and continuously proved. But the touching crook-knee’d worship of mere
social rank still remains an ingredient of the mercantile nature,--it
is inborn and racial,--a kind of microbe in the blood generated there
in old feudal times, when, all over the world, pedlars humbly sought
the patronage and favour of robber chieftains, and unloaded their packs
in the ‘Castle hall’ for the pleasure of the fair ladies who were
kept at home in “durance vile” by their rough, unwashen lords. And so
perhaps it has chanced through long custom and heritage, that at this
present day there is nothing quite so servile in all creation as the
spectacle of the ‘modiste’ in attendance on a Duchess, or a ‘ladies’
tailor’ bending himself double while deferentially presuming to measure
the hips of a Princess. It is quaint,--it is pitiful,--it is intensely,
deliciously comic. And when the price of the garment is never clearly
stated, and the bill never sent in for years lest offence is given to
‘Her Grace’ or ‘Her Highness’--by firms that will, nevertheless, have
no scruple in sending dunning letters and legal threats to _un_-titled
ladies, who may possibly keep them waiting a little for their money,
but whose position and credit are more firmly established than those of
any ‘great’ personages with handles to their names, it is not without
a certain secret satisfaction that one hears of such fawning flunkeys
of trade getting well burnt in the fires of loss and disaster. For in
any case, it may be taken for granted that they always charge a double,
sometimes treble price for a garment or costume, over and above what
that garment or costume is really worth, and one may safely presume
they base all their calculations on possible loss. It is no uncommon
thing to be told that such and such an evening blouse or bodice copied
‘from the Paris model’ will cost Forty Guineas--“We _might_ possibly do
it for Thirty Five,”--says the costumier meditatively, studying with
well-assumed gravity the small, flimsy object he is thus pricing, a
trifle made up of chiffon, ribbon, and tinsel gew-gaws, knowing all the
while that everything of which it is composed could be purchased for
much less than ten pounds. Twenty-five guineas, forty-five guineas,
sixty-five guineas are quite common prices for gowns at any of the
fashionable shops to-day. One cannot, of course, blame the modistes
and outfitting firms for asking these absurd fancy prices if they can
get them. If women are mad, it is perhaps wise, just, and reasonable
to take financial advantage of their madness while it lasts. Certainly
no woman of well-balanced brain would give unlimited prices for gowns
without most careful inquiry as to the correct value of the material
and trimming used for them,--and the feminine creature who runs into
the elaborate show-rooms of Madame Zoë or Berenice, or Faustina, and
orders frocks by the dozen, saying chirpingly: “Oh, yes! _You_ know
how they ought to be made! Your taste is always perfect! Make them
_very_ pretty, won’t you?--_much_ prettier than those you made for Lady
Claribel! Yes!--thanks! I’ll leave it all in your hands!” this woman, I
say, is a mere lunatic, gibbering nonsense, who could not, if she were
asked, tell where twice two making four might possibly lead her in the
sum-total of a banking account.

Not very long ago there was held a wonderful “symposium” of dress at
the establishment of a certain modiste. It was intensely diverting,
entertaining and instructive. A stage was erected at one end of a long
room, and on that stage, with effective flashes of lime-light played
from the “wings” at intervals, and the accompaniment of a Hungarian
band, young ladies wearing “creations” in costume, stood, sat, turned,
twisted and twirled, and finally walked down the room between rows
of spectators to show themselves and the gowns they carried, off to
the best possible advantage. The whole thing was much better than a
stage comedy. Nothing could surpass the quaint peacock-like vanity
of the girl _mannequins_ who strutted up and down, moving their arms
about to exhibit their sleeves and swaying their hips to accentuate
the fall and flow of flounces and draperies. It was a marvellous sight
to behold, and it irresistibly reminded one of a party of impudent
children trying on for fun all their mother’s and elder sisters’ best
“long dresses” while the unsuspecting owners were out of the way. There
was a “programme” of the performance fearfully and wonderfully worded,
the composition, so we were afterwards “with bated breath” informed,
of Madame la Modiste’s sister, a lady, who by virtue of having written
two small skits on the manners, customs and modes of society, is, in
some obliging quarters of the Press called a “novelist.” This programme
instructed us as to the proper views we were expected to take of the
costumes paraded before us, as follows:


FOR THE DINNER PARTY


     Topas
     Elusive Joy
     Pleasure’s Thrall
     Red Mouth of a Venomous Flower


The “Red Mouth of a Venomous Flower” was a harmless-looking girl in a
bright scarlet toilette,--neither the toilette nor the sensational
title suited her. But perhaps the “Cult of Chiffon” presented the most
varied and startling phases to a properly receptive mind. Thus it ran:


THE CULT OF CHIFFON


     The Dirge O’er the Death of Pleasure
     The Fire Motif
     The Meaning of Life is Clear
     Moss and Starlight
     Incessant Soft Desire
     A Frenzied Song of Amorous Things
     A Summer Night Has a Thousand Powers


Faint gigglings shook the bosoms of the profane as the “Incessant Soft
Desire” glided into view, followed by “A Frenzied Song of Amorous
Things,”--indeed it would have been positively unnatural and inhuman
had no one laughed. Curious to relate, there were quite a large number
of “gentlemen” at this remarkable exhibition of feminine clothes,
many of them well known and easily recognizable. Certain _flaneurs_
of Bond Street, various loafers familiar to the Carlton “lounge,” and
celebrated Piccadilly-trotters, formed nearly one half of the audience,
and stared with easy insolence at the “Red Mouth of a Venomous Flower”
or smiled suggestively at “Incessant Soft Desire.” They were invited to
stare and smile, and they did it. But there was something remarkably
offensive in their way of doing it, and perhaps if a few thick boots
worn on the feet of rough but honest workmen had come into contact
with their smooth personalities on their way out of Madame Modiste’s
establishment, it might have done them good and taught them a useful
lesson. Needless to say that the prices of the Madame Modiste who could
set forth such an exhibition of melodramatically designated feminine
apparel as “The Night has a Thousand Eyes,” or “Spring’s Delirium,”
were in suitable proportion to a “frenzied song of amorous things.”
Such amorous things as are “created” in her establishment are likely to
make husbands and fathers know exactly what “a frenzied song” means.
When the payment of the bills is concerned, they will probably sing
that “frenzied song” themselves.

It is quite easy to dress well and tastefully without
spending a very great deal of money. It certainly requires
brain--thought--foresight--taste--and comprehension of the harmony
of colours. But the blind following of a fashion because Madame This
or That says it is “chic” or “le dernier cri,” or some parrot-like
recommendation of the sort, is mere stupidity on the part of the
followers. To run up long credit for dresses, without the least idea
how the account is ever going to be paid, is nothing less than a
criminal act. It is simply fraud. And such fraud re-acts on the whole
community.

Extravagant taste in dress is infectious. Most of us are impressed by
the King’s sensible and earnest desire that the Press should use its
influence for good in fostering amity between ourselves and foreign
countries. If the Press would equally use its efforts to discourage
florid descriptions of dress in their columns, much of the wild and
wilful extravagance which is frequently the ruin of otherwise happy
homes, might be avoided. When Lady A sees her loathëd rival Lady B’s
dress described in half a column of newspaper “gush” she straightway
yearns and schemes for a whole column of the same kind. When simple
country girls read the amazing items of the “toilettes” worn by some
notorious “demi-mondaine,” they begin to wonder how it is she has
such things, and to speculate as to whether they will ever be able
to obtain similar glorified apparel for themselves. And so the evil
grows, till by and by it becomes a pernicious disease, and women look
superciliously at one another, not for what they are, but merely
to estimate the quality and style of what they put on their backs.
Virtue goes to the wall if it does not wear a fashionable frock.
Vice is welcomed everywhere if it is clothed in a Paris “creation.”
Nevertheless, Ben Jonson’s lines still hold good:


     Still to be neat, still to be drest,
     As you were going to a feast;
     Still to be powder’d, still perfumed:
     Lady, it is to be presumed,
     Though art’s hid causes are not found
     All is not sweet, all is not sound.


“All is not sweet, all is not sound,” when women think little or
nothing of ordering extravagant costumes which they well know they will
never be able to pay for, unless through some dishonourable means, such
as gambling at Bridge for example. Madame Modiste is quite prepared
for such an exigency, for she does not forget to show “creations” in
clothes which, she softly purrs, are “suitable for Bridge parties.”
They may possibly be called--“The Tricky Trump”--or “The Dazzling of
a Glance too long” or “The Deft Impress of a Finger nail”! One never
knows!

Any amount of fashion papers find their way into the average British
household, containing rabid nonsense such as the following:

“There were wonderful stories afloat about Miss B’s dresses. Rumour has
it that a dressmaker came over specially from New York to requisition
the services of the most important artistes in Paris, and gold lace and
hand embroidery were used with no frugal hand; yet, _despite this_ and
the warm welcome accorded her by an English audience, Miss B does not
seem to have made up her mind to stay with us long, for it is said the
end of June will see the end of her season. We have sketched her in
her pink chiffon wrap, which is made in the Empire shape covered with
chiffon and decorated with bunches of chiffon flowers and green leaves
held with bows of pink satin--a most dainty affair, full of delicate
detail and pre-eminently becoming.”

“Despite this,”--is rich indeed! Despite the fact that “gold lace and
hand-embroidery” were used “with no frugal hand,” Miss B is determined
to leave “the gay, the gay and glittering scene,” and deprive us of
her “pink chiffon wrap in the Empire shape”! A positively disastrous
conclusion! Nay, but hearken to the maudlin murmurs of the crazed
worshippers of Mumbo-Jumbo “Fashion”--

“Do you yearn for a grey muslin dress? Half my ‘smart girl’
acquaintances are buying grey muslins as though their lives depended
on it. I fell in love with one of them that was in bouilloné gathers
all round the skirt to within eight inches of the hem, while the
yoke had similar but smaller bouillonés run through, well below the
shoulder-line, with a wide chiné ribbon knotted low in front. Beneath
this encircling ribbon the bodice pouched in blouse fashion over a
chiné waist-ribbon to match, with long pendant ends one side; the
sleeves were a distinct novelty, being set in a number of small puffs
below one big one, a chiné ribbon being knotted around the arm between
each puff.”

“Do you ‘yearn’ for a grey muslin dress?” O ye gods! One is reminded of
a comic passage in the “Artemus Ward” papers, where it is related how
a lady of the “Free Love” persuasion rushed at the American humorist,
brandishing a cotton umbrella and crying out: “Dost thou not yearn
for me?” to which adjuration Artemus replied, while he “dodged” the
umbrella--“Not a yearn!”

“I should like,”--says one of the poor imbecile “dress” devotees, “the
skirt finished off with a wadded hem, or perhaps a few folds of satin,
but otherwise it should be left severely plain. These satin, brocade,
or velvet dresses should stand or fall by their own merits, and never
be over-elaborated.”

True! And is it “a wadded hem” or a padded room that should “finish
off” these people who spread the madness of clothes far and wide till
it becomes a positively dangerous and immoral infection? One wonders!
For there is no more mischievous wickedness in society to-day than the
flamboyant, exuberant, wilful extravagance of women’s dress. It has far
exceeded the natural and pretty vanity of permissible charm, good taste
and elegance. It has become a riotous waste,--an ugly disease of moral
principle, ending at last in the disgrace and death of many a woman’s
good name.




THE DECAY OF HOME LIFE IN ENGLAND


When people tell the truth they are generally disliked. From Socrates,
to the latest of his modern philosophic imitators, the bowl of
death-dealing hemlock has always been mixed by the world and held to
the lips of those who dare to say uncomfortably plain things. When
the late W. E. H. Lecky set down the truth of Cecil Rhodes, in his
book entitled _The Map of Life_, and I, the present writer, ventured
to quote the passage in “The Vulgarity of Wealth,” when that article
was first published, a number of uninformed individuals rashly accused
me of “abusing Cecil Rhodes.” They were naturally afraid to attack
the greater writer. Inasmuch, said they: “If Mr. Lecky had _really_
suggested that Cecil Rhodes was not, like Brutus, ‘an honourable man,’
he, Mr. Lecky, would never have received the King’s new ‘Order of
Merit,’ nor would Mr. Rhodes have been the subject of so much eulogy.
For, of course, the King has read _The Map of Life_, and is aware of
the assertions contained in it.” Now I wish, dear gossips all, you
would read _The Map of Life_ for yourselves! You will find, if you do,
not only plain facts concerning Rhodes, and the vulgarity, i.e. the
ostentation of wealth, but much useful information on sundry other
matters closely concerning various manners and customs of the present
day. For one example, consider the following:

“The amount of pure and almost spontaneous malevolence in the world is
probably far greater than we at first imagine.... No one, for example,
can study the anonymous press, without perceiving how large a part of
it is employed _systematically_, _persistently_ and _deliberately_ in
fostering class, or individual or international hatreds, and often _in
circulating falsehoods to attain this end_. Many newspapers notoriously
depend for their existence on such appeals, and more than any other
instruments, they inflame and perpetuate those permanent animosities
which most endanger the peace of mankind. The fact that such newspapers
are becoming in many countries the main and almost exclusive reading of
the million, forms the most serious deduction from the value of modern
education.”

Let it be noted, once and for all, that it is not the present writer
who thus speaks of “the anonymous press,” but the experienced,
brilliant and unprejudiced scholar who was among the first to hold the
King’s “Order of Merit.” And so once again to our muttons:--

“Some of the very worst acts of which man can be guilty are acts which
are commonly untouched by law, and only faintly censured by opinion.
Political crimes, which a false and sickly sentiment so readily
condones, are conspicuous among them. Men who have been gambling for
wealth and power with the lives and fortunes of multitudes; men who
for their own personal ambition are prepared to sacrifice the most
vital interests of their country; men, who in time of great national
danger and excitement deliberately launch falsehood after falsehood
in the public press, in the well-founded conviction that they will do
their evil work before they can be contradicted, may be met shameless
and almost uncensured in Parliaments and drawing-rooms. The amount
of false statements in the world which cannot be attributed to mere
carelessness, inaccuracy or exaggeration, but which is plainly both
deliberate and malevolent, can hardly be overrated. Sometimes it is
due to a mere desire to create a lucrative sensation, or to gratify
a personal dislike, or even to an unprovoked malevolence which takes
pleasure in inflicting pain. * * * Very often it (i.e. the false
statement in the press) is intended for purposes of stock-jobbing.
The financial world is percolated with it. It is the common method
of raising or depreciating securities, attracting investors, preying
upon the ignorant and credulous, and enabling dishonest men to rise
rapidly to fortune. When the prospect of speedy wealth is in sight,
there are always numbers who are perfectly prepared to pursue courses
involving the utter ruin of multitudes, endangering the most serious
international interests, perhaps bringing down upon the world all the
calamities of war.... It is much to be questioned whether the greatest
criminals are to be found within the walls of prisons. Dishonesty on
a small scale nearly always finds its punishment. Dishonesty on a
gigantic scale continually escapes.... In the management of companies,
in the great fields of industrial enterprise and speculation, gigantic
fortunes are acquired by the ruin of multitudes; and by methods which
though they avoid legal penalties are essentially fraudulent. In the
majority of cases these crimes are perpetrated by educated men who are
in possession of all the necessaries, of most comforts, and of many
luxuries of life, and some of the worst of them are powerfully favoured
by the conditions of modern civilization. There is no greater scandal
or moral evil in our time than the readiness with which public opinion
excuses them, and the influence and social position it accords to mere
wealth, even when it has been acquired by notorious dishonesty, or when
it is expended with absolute selfishness or in ways that are absolutely
demoralising. In many respects the moral progress of mankind seems to
me incontestable, but it is extremely doubtful whether in this respect,
social morality, especially in England and America, has not seriously
retrograded.”

               *       *       *       *       *
                   *       *       *       *
                       *       *       *
                           *       *

Now had I written the foregoing lines, some hundred or so of
pleasant newspaper friends would have accused me of “screaming” out
a denunciation of wealth, or of “railing” against society. But as
Lecky,--with the King’s “Order of Merit,” appended to his distinguished
name,--was the real author of the quotation, I am not without hope
that his views may be judged worthy of consideration, even though his
works may not be as thoughtfully studied as their excellence merits.
It is not I--it was Mr. Lecky, who doubted whether “social morality
both in England and America, had not seriously retrograded.” But, if
it has so retrograded, there need be very little difficulty in tracing
the retrogression to its direct source,--namely, to the carelessness,
vanity, extravagance, lack of high principle, and entire lapse of
dignity in the women who constitute and lead what is called the Smart
Set. These women cannot be termed as of the Aristocracy, for the
Aristocracy, (by which term I mean those who are lineally entitled
to be considered the actual British nobility, and not the mushroom
creations of yesterday), will, more often than not, decline to have
anything to do with them. True, there are some “great” ladies, who
have deliberately and voluntarily fallen from their high estate in
the sight of a scandalised public, and who, by birth and breeding,
should assuredly have possessed more pride and self-respect, than to
wilfully descend into the mire. But the very fact that these few have
so lamentably failed to support the responsibilities of their position,
makes it all the sadder for the many good and true women of noble
family who endeavour, as best they may, to stem the tide of harmful
circumstance, and to show by the retired simplicity and intellectual
charm of their own lives, that though society is fast becoming a
disordered wilderness of American and South African “scrub,” there yet
remains within it a flourishing scion of the brave old English Oak of
Honour, guarded by the plain device “Noblesse Oblige.”

The influence of women bears perhaps more strongly than any other
power on the position and supremacy of a country. Corrupt women make
a corrupt State,--noble, God-fearing women make a noble, God-fearing
people. It is not too much to say that the prosperity or adversity
of a nation rests in the hands of its women. They are the mothers of
the men,--they make and mould the characters of their sons. And the
centre of their influence should be, as Nature intended it to be, the
Home. Home is the pivot round which the wheel of a country’s highest
statesmanship should revolve,--the preservation of Home, its interests,
its duties and principles, should be the aim of every good citizen. But
with the “retrogression of social morality,” as Mr. Lecky phrased it,
and as part and parcel of that backward action and movement, has gone
the gradual decay of home life, and a growing indifference to home as
a centre of attraction and influence, together with the undermining
of family ties and affections, which, rightly used and considered,
should form the strongest bulwark to our national strength. The love
of home,--the desire to _make_ a home,--is far stronger in the poorer
classes nowadays than in the wealthy or even the moderately rich of the
general community. Women of the “upper ten” are no longer pre-eminent
as rulers of the home, but are to be seen daily and nightly as noisy
and pushing frequenters of public restaurants. The great lady is
seldom or never to be found “at home” on her own domain,--but she may
be easily met at the Carlton, Prince’s, or the Berkeley (on Sundays).
The old-world châtelaine of a great house who took pride in looking
after the comfort of all her retainers,--who displayed an active
interest in every detail of management,--surrounding herself with
choice furniture, fine pictures, sweet linen, beautiful flowers, and
home delicates of her own personal make or supervision, is becoming
well-nigh obsolete. “It is such a bore being at home!” is quite an
ordinary phrase with the gawk-girl of the present day, who has no idea
of the value of rest as an aid to beauty, or of the healthful and
strengthening influences of a quiet and well-cultivated mind, and who
has made herself what is sometimes casually termed a “sight” by her
skill at hockey, her speed in cycling, and her general “rushing about,”
in order to get anywhere away from the detested “home.” The mother of
a family now aspires to seem as young as her daughters, and among the
vanishing graces of society may be noted the grace of old age. Nobody
is old nowadays. Men of sixty wed girls of sixteen, women of fifty lead
boys of twenty to the sacrificial altar. Such things are repulsive,
abominable and unnatural, but they are done every day, and a certain
“social set,” smirk the usual conventional hypocritical approval, few
having the courage to protest against what they must inwardly recognize
as both outrageous and indecent. The real “old” lady, the real “old”
gentleman will soon be counted among the “rare and curious” specimens
of the race. The mother who was _not_ “married at sixteen,” will ere
long be a remarkable prodigy, and the paterfamilias who never explains
that he “made an unfortunate marriage when quite a boy,” will rank
beside her as a companion phenomenon. We have only to scan the pages of
those periodicals which cater specially for fashionable folk, to see
what a frantic dread of age pervades all classes of pleasure-loving
society. The innumerable nostrums for removing wrinkles, massaging or
“steaming” the complexion, the “coverings” for thin hair, the “rays,”
of gold or copper or auburn, which are cunningly contrived for grey,
or to use the more polite word, “faded,” tresses, the great army of
manicurists, masseurs and “beauty-specialists,” who, in the most
clever way, manage to make comfortable incomes out of the general
panic which apparently prevails among their patrons at the inflexible,
unstoppable march of Time,--all these things are striking proofs of
the constant desperate fight kept up by a large and foolish majority
against the laws of God and of Nature. Nor is the category confined to
persons of admittedly weak intellect, as might readily be imagined,
for just as the sapient Mr. Andrew Lang has almost been convicted
of a hesitating faith in magic crystals, (God save him!) so are the
names of many men, eminent in scholarship and politics, “down on the
list” of the dyer, the steamer, the padder, the muscle-improver, the
nail-polisher, the wrinkle-remover, and the eye-embellisher. Which
facts, though apparently trivial, are so many brief hints of a “giving”
in the masculine stamina. “It is but foolery; but it is such a kind of
gain-giving as would perhaps trouble a woman.” Vide _Hamlet_. Such it
may be,--let us hope that such it is.

No doubt much of this fantastic dread of “looking old,” arises from the
fact that nowadays age, instead of receiving the honour it merits, is
frequently made the butt of ignorant and vulgar ridicule. One exception
alone is allowed in the case of our gracious Queen Alexandra, who
supports her years with so much ease and scarcely diminished beauty.
But there are hosts of other women beside the Queen whom it would
seem that “age cannot wither,”--Sarah Bernhardt, for example, whose
brilliant vitality is the envy of all her feminine compeers; while
many leading “beauties” who never scored a success in their teens,
are now trampling triumphantly over men’s hearts in their forties.
Nevertheless the boorish sections of the Press and of society take a
special delight, (Mr. Lecky calls it “pure malevolence,”) in making
the advance of age a subject for coarse jesting, whereas if rightly
viewed, the decline of the body is merely the natural withering of
that chrysalis which contains the ever young and immortal Soul. Forced
asunder by the strength of unfolding wings, the chrysalis _must_ break;
and its breaking should not cause regret, but joy. Of course if faith
in God is a mere dead letter, and poor humanity is taught to consider
this brief life as our sole beginning and end, I can quite imagine that
the advance of years may be looked upon with dislike and fear,--though
scarcely with ridicule. But for the happy beings who are conscious that
while the body grows weaker, the Soul grows stronger,--who feel that
behind this mere passing “reflection” of Life, the real Life awaits
them, age has no drawbacks and no forebodings of evil. The prevailing
dread of it, and the universal fighting against it, betoken an insecure
and wholly materialistic mental attitude.

Of the feminine indulgence in complexion cures, combined with the
deplorable lack of common sense, which shows itself in the constant
consultation of palmists and clairvoyants, while home and family
duties are completely neglected or forgotten, the less said the better.
By such conduct women appear to be voluntarily straying back to the
dark ages when people believed in witches and soothsayers, and would
pay five shillings or more to see the faces of their future husbands
in the village well. Happy the man who, at the crucial moment, looked
over the shoulder of the enquiring maiden! He was sure to be accepted
on the value of his own mirrored reflection, apart altogether from
his possible personal merits. To this day in Devonshire, many young
women believe in the demoniacal abilities of a harmless old gentleman
who leads a retired life on the moors, and who is supposed to be able
to “do something to somebody.” It would be a hard task to explain
the real meaning of this somewhat vague phrase, but the following
solution can be safely given without any harm accruing. It works
out in this way: If you know “somebody,” who is unpleasant to you,
go to this old gentleman and give him five shillings, and he will
“do something”--never mind what. It may be safely prophesied that
he will spend the five shillings; the rest is involved in mystery.
Now, however silly this superstition on the part of poor Devonshire
maids may be, it is not a whit more so than the behaviour of the
so-called “cultured” woman of fashion who spends a couple of guineas
in one of the rooms or “salons,” near Bond Street, on the fraudulent
rascal of a “palmist,” or “crystal-gazer,” who has the impudence
and presumption to pretend to know her past and her future. It is a
wonder that the women who patronize these professional cheats have
not more self-respect than to enter such dens, where the crime of
“obtaining money on false pretences” is daily practised without
the intervention of the law. But all the mischief starts from the
same source,--neglect of home, indifference to home duties, and the
constant “gadding-about” which seems to be the principal delight and
aim of women who are amply supplied with the means of subsistence,
either through inherited fortune, or through marriage with a wealthy
partner, and who consider themselves totally exempt from the divine
necessity of Work. Yet these are truly the very ones whose duty it is
to work the hardest, because “Unto whom much is given even from him
(or her) shall much be required.” No woman who has a home need ever
be idle. If she employs her time properly, she will find no leisure
for gossiping, scandal-mongering, moping, grumbling, “fadding,”
fortune-telling or crystal-gazing. Of course, if she “manages” her
household merely through a paid housekeeper, she cannot be said to
govern the establishment at all. The housekeeper is the real mistress,
and very soon secures such a position of authority, that the lady who
employs and pays her scarcely dare give an order without her. Speaking
on this subject a few days ago with a distinguished and mild-tempered
gentleman, who has long ceased to expect any comfort or pleasure in
the magnificent house his wealth pays for, but which under its present
government might as well be a hotel where he is sometimes allowed
to take the head of the table, he said to me, with an air of quiet
resignation:--“Ladies have so many more interests nowadays than in my
father’s time. They do so many things. It is really bewildering! My
wife, for example, is always out. She has so many engagements. She has
scarcely five minutes to herself, and is often quite knocked up with
fatigue and excitement. She has no time to attend to housekeeping,
and of course the children are almost entirely with their nurse
and governess.” This description applies to most households of a
fashionable or “smart” character, and shows what a topsy-turveydom of
the laws of Nature is allowed to pass muster, and to even meet with
general approval. The “wife” of whom my honourable and distinguished
friend spoke to me, rises languidly from her bed at eleven, and
occupies all her time till two o’clock in dressing, manicuring,
“transforming” and “massaging.” She also receives and sends a few
telegrams. At two o’clock she goes out in her carriage and lunches with
some chosen intimates at one or other of the fashionable restaurants.
Lunch over, she returns home and lies down for an hour. Then she arrays
herself in an elaborate tea gown and receives a favoured few in her
boudoir, where over a cup of tea she assists to tear into piecemeal
portions the characters of her dearest friends. Another “rest” and
again the business of the toilette is resumed. When _en grande tenue_
she either goes out to dinner, or entertains a large party of guests at
her own table. A _tête-à-tête_ meal with her husband would appear to
her in the light of a positive calamity. She stays up playing “Bridge”
till two or three o’clock in the morning, and retires to bed more or
less exhausted, and can only sleep with the aid of narcotics. She
resumes the same useless existence, and perpetrates the same wicked
waste of time again the next day and every day. Her children she
scarcely sees, and the management of her house is entirely removed from
her hands. The housekeeper takes all the accounts to her husband, who
meekly pays the same, and lives for the most part at his club, or at
the houses of his various sporting friends. “Home” is for him a mere
farce. He knew what it was in his mother’s day, when his grand old
historical seat was a home indeed, and all the members of the family,
young and old, looked upon it as the chief centre of attraction, and
the garnering-point of love and faith and confidence; but since he
grew up to manhood, and took for his life-partner a rapid lady of the
new Motor-School of Morals, he stands like Marius among the ruins of
Carthage, contemplating the complete wreckage of his ship of life, and
knowing sadly enough that he can never sail the seas of hope again.

The word “Home” has, or used to have, a very sacred meaning, and
is peculiarly British. The French have no such term. “Chez-moi”
or “chez-soi” are poor substitutes, and indeed none of the Latin
races appear to have any expression which properly conveys the real
sentiment. The Germans have it, and their “Heimweh” is as significant
as our “home-sickness.” The Germans are essentially a home-loving
people, and this may be said of all Teutonic, Norse and Scandinavian
races. By far the strongest blood of the British is inherited from the
North,--and as a rule the natural tendency in the pure Briton is one
of scorn for the changeful, vagrant, idle, careless and semi-pagan
temperament of southern nations. As the last of our real Laureates
sang in his own matchless way:


     Oh, tell her, Swallow, thou that knowest each
     That bright and fierce and fickle is the South,
     And dark and true and tender is the North!

     Oh, tell her, Swallow, that thy brood is flown;
     Say that I do but wanton in the South,
     But in the North, long since, my nest is made!


“My nest is made,” is the ultimatum of the lover,--the “nest” or the
home being the natural centre of the circle of man’s ambition. A happy
home is the best and surest safeguard against all evil; and where home
is not happy, there the devil may freely enter and find his hands
full. With women, and women only, this happiness in the home must find
its foundation. They only are responsible; for no matter how wild and
erring a man may be, if he can always rely on finding somewhere in
the world a peaceful, well-ordered, and _undishonoured_ home, he will
feel the saving grace of it sooner or later, and turn to it as the one
bright beacon in a darkening wilderness. But if he knows that it is a
mere hostelry,--that his wife has no pride in it,--that other men than
himself have found the right to enter there,--that his servants mock
him behind his back as a poor, weak, credulous fool, who has lost all
claim to mastership or control, he grows to hate the very walls of
the dwelling, and does his best to lose himself and his miseries in a
whirlpool of dissipation and folly, which too often ends in premature
breakdown and death.

One often wonders if the “smart” ladies who cast aside the quiet
joys of home life, in exchange for a jostling “feed” at the Carlton
or other similar resorts, have any idea of the opinion entertained of
their conduct by that Great Majority, the People? The People,--without
whom their favoured political candidates would stand no chance of
election,--the People, without whose willing work, performed under
the heavy strain of cruel and increasing competition, they would be
unable to enjoy the costly luxuries they deem indispensable to their
lives,--the People, who, standing in their millions outside “society”
and its endless intrigues,--outside a complaisant or subsidized
Press,--outside all, save God and the Right,--pass judgment on the
events of the day, and entertain their own strong views thereon, which,
though such views may not find any printed outlet, do nevertheless
make themselves felt in various unmistakable ways. Latterly, there has
been a great clamour about servants and the lack of them. It is quite
true that many ladies find it difficult to secure servants, and that
even when they do secure them, they often turn out badly, being of an
untrained and incompetent class. But why is this? No doubt many causes
work together to make up the sum of deficiency or inefficiency, but
one reason can be given which is possibly entirely unsuspected. It is
a reason which will no doubt astonish some, and awaken the tittering
ridicule of many, but the fact remains unalterable, despite incredulity
and denial. There is really no lack of competent domestic servants.
On the contrary, there are plenty of respectable, willing, smart,
well-instructed girls in the country, who would make what are called
“treasures” in the way of housemaids, parlourmaids and lady’s-maids,
but whose parents stubbornly refuse to let them enter any situation
until they know something of the character of the mistress with whom
they are expected to reside, and the general reputation of the house
or “home” they are to enter. I could name dozens of cases where girls,
on enquiry, have actually declined lucrative situations, and contented
themselves with work at lower wages, rather than be known as “in
service” with certain distinguished ladies. “My girl,” says a farmer’s
wife, “is a clean, wholesome, steady lass; I’d rather keep her by me
for a bit than see her mixing herself up with the fashionable folk,
who are always getting into the divorce court.” This may be a bitter
pill of information for the “smart set” to swallow; but there is no
exaggeration in the statement that the working classes have very little
respect left nowadays for the ladies of the “Upper Ten,” and many of
the wives of honest farmers, mechanics and tradesmen would consider
that they were voluntarily handing over their daughters to temptation
and disgrace by allowing them to enter domestic service with certain
society leaders, who, though bearing well-known names, are branded by
equally well-known “easy virtue.”

Does any one at this time of day recall a certain chapter in the
immortal story of _Bleak House_, by Charles Dickens, when Mr.
Rouncewell, the iron-master, a mere tradesman in the opinion of that
haughty old aristocrat, Sir Leicester Dedlock, desires to remove the
pretty girl, Rosa, lady’s-maid to Lady Dedlock, at once from her
situation, if she is to marry his son? An extract from this scene may
not here be altogether out of place.

Lady Dedlock has enquired of the iron-master if the love-affair between
her lady’s-maid and his son is still going on, and receives an answer
in the affirmative.


     “‘If you remember anything so unimportant,’ he says--‘which is not
     to be expected--you would recollect that my first thought in the
     affair was directly opposed to her remaining here.’

     “Dismiss the Dedlock patronage from consideration? Oh! Sir
     Leicester is bound to believe a pair of ears that have been
     handed down to him through such a family, or he really might have
     mistrusted their report of the iron-gentleman’s observation!

     “‘It is not necessary,’ observes my Lady, in her coldest manner,
     before he can do anything but breathe amazedly, ‘to enter into
     these matters on either side. The girl is a very good girl; I
     have nothing whatever to say against her; but she is so far
     insensible to her many advantages and her good fortune, that she
     is in love--or supposes she is, poor little fool--and unable to
     appreciate them.’

     “Sir Leicester begs to observe that wholly alters the case. He
     might have been sure that my Lady had the best grounds and reasons
     in support of her view. He entirely agrees with my Lady. The young
     woman had better go.

     “‘As Sir Leicester observed, Mr. Rouncewell, on the last
     occasion when we were fatigued by this business,’ Lady Dedlock
     languidly proceeds, ‘we cannot make conditions with you. Without
     conditions, and under present circumstances, the girl is quite
     misplaced here and had better go. I have told her so. Would you
     wish to have her sent back to the village, or would you like to
     take her with you, or what would you prefer?’

     “‘Lady Dedlock, if I may speak plainly----’

     “‘By all means.’

     “‘I should prefer the course which will the sooner relieve you of
     the encumbrance, _and remove her from her present position_.’

     “‘And to speak as plainly,’ she returns, with the same studied
     carelessness, ‘so should I. Do I understand that you will take her
     with you?’

     “The iron-gentleman makes an iron bow.

                  *       *       *       *       *

     “‘Sir Leicester and Lady Dedlock,’ says Mr. Rouncewell, after a
     pause of a few moments; ‘I beg to take my leave with an apology
     for having again troubled you. I can very well understand, I
     assure you, how very tiresome so small a matter must have become
     to Lady Dedlock. If I am doubtful on my dealing with it, it is
     only _because I did not at first quietly exert my influence to
     take my young friend here away_ without troubling you at all.
     I hope you will excuse my want of acquaintance with the polite
     world.”


As a matter of fact, certain rumours against Lady Dedlock’s reputation,
and hints as to her “past,” have come to the ears of the honest
tradesman, and he prefers to remove his son’s betrothed wife from the
contact of a possible pernicious influence. The very same thing is
done scores of times over in many similar cases to-day.

No one knows the real character and disposition of the mistress of a
home better than the servants she employs, and if she is honoured and
loved by her domestics, she stands on surer ground than the praise or
flattery of her fashionable friends. It is all a question of “home”
again. A real home is a home to all connected with it. The very
kitchen-maid employed in it, the boy who runs errands for the house;
indeed every servant, from the lowest to the highest, should feel that
their surroundings are truly “homelike,”--that things are well-ordered,
peaceful and happy; that the presiding spirit of the place, the
mistress, is contented with her life, and cheerfully interested in
the welfare of all around her,--then “all things work together for
good,” and the house becomes a bulwark against adversity, a harbour
in storm, a “nest” indeed, where warmth, repose, and mutual trust and
help make the days sweet and the nights calm. But where the mistress
is scarcely ever at home,--when she prefers public restaurants to her
own dining-room,--when with each change of the seasons she is gadding
about somewhere, and avoiding home as much as possible, how is it to be
expected that even servants will care to stay with her, or ever learn
to admire and respect her? Peace and happiness are hers to possess in
the natural and God-given ways of home life, if she chooses,--but if
she turns aside from her real sovereignty, throws down her sceptre and
plays with the sticks and straws of the “half-world,” she has only
herself to blame if the end should prove but dire confusion and the
bitterness of strife.

Apart altogether from the individual dignity and self-poise which are
invariably lacking to the “vagrant,” or home despising human being,
the decay of home life in England is a serious menace to the Empire’s
future strength. If our coming race of men have been accustomed to see
their mothers indulging in a kind of high-class public house feasting,
combined with public house morals, and have learned from them an
absolute indifference to home and home ties, they in their turn will do
likewise and live as “vagrants,”--here, there and everywhere, rather
than as well-established, self-respecting citizens and patriots, proud
of their country, and proud of the right to defend their homes. Even as
it is, there are not wanting signs of a general “wandering,” tendency,
combined with morbid apathy and sickly inertia. “One place is as good
as another,” says one section of society, and “anything is better than
the English climate,” says another, preparing to pack off to Egypt or
the Riviera at the first snap of winter. These opinions are an exact
reversion of those expressed by our sturdy, patriotic forefathers,
who made the glory of Great Britain. “There is no place like England”
was their sworn conviction, and “no place like home” was the essence
of their national sentiment. The English climate, too, was quite good
enough for them, and they made the best of it. When will the “Smart
Set” grasp the fact that the much-abused weather, whatever it may be,
is pretty much the same all over Europe? The Riviera is no warmer than
the Cornish coast, but _certes_ it is better provided with hotels,
and--chiefest attraction of all--it has a Gambling Hell. The delights
of Monte Carlo and “Home,” are as far apart as the poles; and those
who seek the one cannot be expected to appreciate the other. But such
English women as are met at the foreign gambling-tables, season after
season, may be looked upon as the deliberate destroyers of all that is
best and strongest in our national life, in the sanctity of Home, and
the beauty of home affections. The English Home used to be a model to
the world;--with a few more scandalous divorce cases in high life, it
will become a by-word for the mockery of nations. The following from
the current Press is sufficiently instructive:


     “The crowd of well-dressed women who daily throng the court during
     the hearing of the ... case and follow with such intense eagerness
     every incident in the dissection of a woman’s honour afford a
     remarkable object-lesson in contemporary social progress.

     “Ladies, richly garbed, who drive up in smart broughams,
     emblazoned carriages, and motor-cars, and are representative of
     the best known families in the land, fight and scramble for a
     seat, criticize the proceedings in a low monotone, and, without
     the smallest indication of a blush, balance every point made by
     counsel, and follow with keen apprehension the most suggestive
     evidence.

     “Others, no less intensely interested in the sordid details of
     divorce, come on foot--women of the great well-to-do middle-class,
     who have all their lives had the advantage of refined and
     educated surroundings. Some are old, with silvery hair; others
     are middle-aged women, who bring comely daughters still in their
     teens; others are in the first flush of womanhood; but they all
     crowd into the narrow court and struggle to get a glimpse of the
     chief actors in the drama, and listen to the testimony which would
     convict them of dishonour.”


No one in their sober senses will call any of these women fit to
rule their homes, or to be examples to their children. Unblushingly
indecent, and unspeakably vulgar, their brazen effrontery and shameless
interest in the revolting details of a revolting case, have shown them
to be beyond the pale of all true womanhood, and utterly unfit to be
the mothers of our future men, or guardians of the honour of home and
family. There is no “railing” against society in this assertion; the
plain facts speak for themselves.

The charm of home depends, of course, entirely on the upbringing
and character of the inmates. Stupid and illiterate people make a
dull fireside. Morbid faddists, always talking and thinking about
themselves, put the fire out altogether. If I were asked my opinion as
to the chief talent or gift for making a home happy, I should without
a moment’s hesitation, reply, “Cheerfulness.” A cheerful spirit,
always looking on the bright side, and determined to make the best of
everything, is the choicest blessing and the brightest charm of home.
People with a turn for grumbling should certainly live in hotels and
dine at restaurants. They will never understand how to make, or to
keep, a home as it should be. But, given a cheerful, equable, and
active temperament, there is nothing sweeter, happier or safer for
the human being than Home, and the life which centres within it, and
the duties concerning it which demand our attention and care. There
is no need for women to wander far afield for an outlet to their
energies. Their work waits for them at their own doors, in the town
or village where they reside. No end of useful, kind and neighbourly
things are to hand for their doing,--every day can be filled, like
a basket of flowers, full of good deeds and gentle words by every
woman, poor or rich, who has either cottage or mansion which she can
truly call “Home.” Home is a simple background, against which the star
of womanhood shines brightest and best. The modern “gad-about” who
suggests a composition of female chimpanzee and fashionable “Johnny”
combined, is a kind of sexless creature for whom “Home” would only be a
cage in the general menagerie. She (or It) would merely occupy the time
in scrambling about from perch to perch, screaming on the slightest
provocation, and snapping at such other similar neuter creatures who
chanced to possess longer or more bushy tails. And it is a pity such
an example should be thought worthy of imitation by any woman claiming
to possess the advantage of human reason. But the Chimpanzee type of
female is just now singularly _en evidence_, having a habit of pushing
to the front on all occasions, and performing such strange antics as
call for public protest, and keep the grinding machinery of the law
only too busy. The Press, too, pays an enormous amount of unnecessary
attention to the performances of these more or less immodest animals,
so that it sometimes seems to our Continental neighbours as if we, as
a nation, had no real women left, but only chimpanzees. There are,
however, slight stirrings of a movement among the true “ladies” of
England, those who stand more or less aloof from the “smart set,”--a
movement indicative of “drawing the line somewhere.” It is possible
that there may yet be a revival of “Home” and its various lost graces
and dignities. We may even hear of doors that will not open to
millionaires simply _because_ they are millionaires. Only the other day
a very great lady said to her sister in my hearing: “No, I shall not
‘present’ my two girls at all. Society is perfectly demoralised, and
I would rather the children remained out of it, so far as London is
concerned. They are much happier in the country than in town, and much
healthier, and I want to keep them so. Besides, they love their home!”

Herein is the saving grace of life,--to love one’s home. Love of home
implies lovable people dwelling in the charmed circle,--tender hearts,
quick to respond to every word of love, every whisper of confidence,
every caress. The homeless man is the restless and unhappy man, for
ever seeking what he cannot find. The homeless woman is still more to
be pitied, being entirely and hopelessly out of her natural element.
And the marked tendency which exists nowadays to avoid home life is
wholly mischievous. Women complain that home is “dull,” “quiet,”
“monotonous,” “lonely,” and blame it for all sorts of evils which exist
only in themselves. If a woman cannot be a few hours alone without
finding her house “dull,” her mind must be on the verge of lunacy.
The sense of being unable to endure one’s own company augurs ill for
the moral equilibrium. To preserve good health and sound nerves,
women should always make it a rule to be quite alone at least for a
couple of hours in the course of each day. Let them take that space
to think, to read, to rest, and mentally review their own thoughts,
words and actions in the light of a quiet conscience-time of pause and
meditation. Home is the best place so to rest and meditate,--and the
hours that are spent in thinking how to make that home happier will
never be wasted. It should be very seriously borne in mind that it is
only in the home life that marriage can be proved successful or the
reverse, and, to quote Mr. Lecky once more:


     “A moral basis of sterling qualities is of capital importance. A
     true, honest and trustworthy nature, capable of self-sacrifice and
     self-restraint, should rank in the first line, and after that, a
     kindly, equable and contented temper, a power of sympathy, a habit
     of looking at the better and brighter side of men and things. Of
     intellectual qualities, judgment, tact and order, are perhaps the
     most valuable.... Grace and the charm of manner will retain their
     full attraction to the last. They brighten in innumerable ways
     the little things of life, and life is mainly made up of little
     things, exposed to petty frictions, and requiring small decisions
     and small sacrifices. Wide interests and large appreciations
     are in the marriage relation more important than any great
     constructive or creative talent, and the power to soothe, to
     sympathize, to counsel and to endure than the highest qualities
     of the hero or the saint. It is by this alone that the married
     life attains its full perfection.”


And when we hear, as we so often do, of the complete failure and
deplorable disaster attending many marriages, let us look for the
root of the evil at its foundation,--namely the decay of home life,
the neglect and avoidance of home and home duties,--the indifference
to, or scorn of home influence. For whenever any woman, rich or poor,
high in rank or of humble estate, throws these aside, and turns her
back on Home, her own natural, beautiful and thrice-blessed sphere of
action, she performs what would be called the crazed act of a queen,
who, called to highest sovereignty, casts away her crown, breaks her
sceptre, tramples on her royal robes, and steps from her throne,
_down_;--down into the dust of a saddened world’s contempt.




SOCIETY AND SUNDAY


According to the latest views publicly expressed by both Christian and
un-Christian clerics, it would appear that twentieth-century Society is
not at one with Sunday. It no longer keeps the seventh day “holy.” It
will not go to church. It declines to listen to dull sermons delivered
by dull preachers. It openly expresses its general contempt for the
collection-plate. It reads its ‘up-to-date’ books and magazines, and
says: “The Sabbath is a Jewish institution. And though the spirit of
the Jew pervades my whole composition and constitution, and though
I borrow money of the Jew whenever I find it convenient, there is
no reason why I should follow the Jew’s religious ritual. The New
Testament lays no stress whatever upon the necessity of keeping the
seventh day holy. On the contrary, it tells us that ‘the Sabbath was
made for man, not man for the Sabbath.’”

This is true enough. It is a difficult point to get over. And despite
the fact that the sovereign rulers of the realm most strictly set the
example to all their subjects of attending Divine service at least once
on Sunday, this example is just the very one among the various leading
patterns of life offered by the King and Queen which Society blandly
sets aside with a smile. For, notwithstanding the constant painstaking
production of exquisitely printed Prayer-books, elegantly bound in
ivory, silver, morocco leather, and silk velvet, Society is not often
seen nowadays with these little emblems of piety in its be-ringed and
be-bangled hands. It prefers a pack of cards. Its ears are more attuned
to the hissing rush of the motor than to the solemn sound of sacred
psalmody; and the dust of the high-road, compounded with the oil-stench
of the newest and fastest automobile, offers a more grateful odour
to its nostrils than the perfume of virginal lilies on the altar of
worship. _Autres temps, autres mœurs!_ People who believe in nothing
have no need of prayer. A social “set” that grabs all it can for itself
without a thank-you to either God or devil is not moved to praise. Self
and the Hour! That is the motto and watchword of Society to-day, and
after Self and the Hour, what then? Why, the Deluge, of course! And,
as happened in olden time, and will happen again, general drowning,
stiflement, and silence.

There is certainly much to regret and deplore in the lack of
serious thought, the neglect of piety, and the scant reverence for
sacred things which, taken together, make up a spirit of callous
indifferentism in our modern life, such as is likely to rob the nation
in future of its backbone and nerve. It is a spirit which is gradually
transforming the social community from thinking, feeling, reasonable
human beings into a mere set of gambolling kangaroos, whose chief
interest would seem to be centred in jumping over each other’s backs,
or sitting on their haunches, grinning foolishly and waving their short
fore-paws at one another with antic gestures of animal delight. They
never get any “forrader,” as it were. They do nothing particularly
useful. They are amused, annoyed, excited, or angry (according to their
different qualities of kangaroo nature) when one jumps a little higher
than the other, or waves its paws a little more attractively; but
their sentiments are as temporary as their passions. There is nothing
to be got out of them any way, but the jumping and the paw-waving. At
the same time it is extremely doubtful as to whether taking them to
church on Sundays would do them good, or bring them back to the human
condition. Things are too far gone--the metamorphosis is too nearly
accomplished. One day is the same as another to the Society kangaroo.
All days are suitable to his or her “hop, skip, and a jump.” But shall
there be no “worship”? What should a kangaroo worship? No “rest”? Why
should a kangaroo rest? “Listen to the Reverend Mr. Soulcure’s sermon,
and learn how to be good!” Ya-ah! One can hear the animal scream as he
or she turns a somersault at the mere suggestion and scuttles away!

Society’s neglect of Sunday observance in these early days of the
new century is due to many things, chiefest among these being the
incapacity of the clergy to inspire interest in their hearers or to
fix the attention of the general public. It is unfortunate that this
should be so, but so it is. The ministers of religion fail to seize the
problems of the time. They forget, or wilfully ignore, the discoveries
of the age. Yet in these could be found endless subject-matter for the
divinest arguments. Religion and science, viewed broadly, do not clash
so much as they combine. To the devout and deeply studious mind, the
marvels of science are the truths of religion made manifest. But this
is what the clergy seem to miss persistently out of all their teaching
and preaching. Take, for example, the text: “In My Father’s house there
are many mansions.” What a noble discourse could be made hereon of
some of the most sublime facts of science!--of the powers of the air,
of the currents of light, of the magnificent movements of the stars in
their courses, of the plenitude and glory of innumerable solar systems,
all upheld and guided by the same Intelligent Force which equally
upholds and guides the destinies of man! Unhappily for the world in
general, and for the churches in particular, preachers who select
texts from Scripture in order to extract therefrom some instructive
lesson that shall be salutary for their congregations, do not always
remember the symbolic or allegorical manner in which such texts were
originally spoken or written. To many of them the “literal” meaning is
alone apparent, and they see in the “many mansions” merely a glorified
Park Lane or Piccadilly, adorned with rows of elegantly commonplace
dwelling-houses built of solid gold. Their conceptions of the “Father’s
house” are sadly limited. They cannot shake off the material from the
spiritual, or get away from themselves sufficiently to understand or
enter into the dumb craving of all human nature for help, for sympathy,
for love--for sureness in its conceptions of God--such sureness as
shall not run counter to the proved results of reason. For reason is
as much the gift of God as speech, and to kill one’s intellectual
aspiration in order, as some bigots would advise, to serve God more
completely is the rankest blasphemy. The wilful refusal to use a great
gift merely insults the Giver.

It is by obstinately declining to watch the branching-out, as it
were, of the great tree of Christianity in forms which are not narrow
or limited, but spacious and far-reaching, that the clergy have in
a great measure lost much that they should have retained. Society
has slipped altogether from their hold. Society sees for itself that
too many clerics are either blatant or timorous. Some of them bully;
others crawl. Some are all softness to the wealthy; all harshness to
the poor. Others, again, devote themselves to the poor entirely, and
neglect the wealthy, who are quite as much, if not more, in need of
a “soul cure” as the most forlorn Lazarus that ever lay in the dust
of the road of life. None of them seem able to cope with the great
dark wave of infidelity and atheism which has swept over the modern
world stealthily, but overwhelmingly, sucking many a struggling soul
down into the depths of suicidal despair. And Society, making up its
mind that it is neither edified nor entertained by going to church on
Sunday, stays away, and turns Sunday generally to other uses. It is
not particular as to what these uses are, provided they prove amusing.
The old-fashioned notion of a “day of rest” or a “good” Sunday can be
set aside with the church and the clergyman; the one desirable object
of existence is “not to be bored.” The spectre of “boredom” is always
gliding in at every modern function, like the ghost of Banquo at
Macbeth’s feast. To pacify and quash this terrible bogie is the chief
aim and end of all the social kangaroos. The Sunday’s observance used
to be the bogie’s great “innings”; but, with an advance in manners and
morals, _nous avons changé tout cela_! And Society spends its Sundays
now in a fashion which, if its great-grandmamma of the early Victorian
era could only see its ways and doings, would so shock the dear,
virtuous old lady that she would yearn to whip it and shut it up in a
room for years on bread and water. And there is no doubt that such a
wholesome régime would do it a power of good!

At the present interesting period of English history, Sunday appears
to be devoutly recognized among the Upper Ten as the great “bridge”
day. It is quite the fashion--the “swagger” thing--to play bridge
all and every Sunday, when and whenever possible. During the London
“season,” the Thames serves as a picturesque setting for many of these
seventh-day revelries. Little gambling-parties are organized “up the
river,” and houses are taken from Saturday to Monday by noted ladies of
the half-world, desirous of “rooking” young men, in the sweet seclusion
of their “country cots by the flowing stream”--an ambition fully
realized in the results of the Sunday’s steady play at bridge from noon
till midnight. At a certain military centre not far from London, too,
the Sunday “gaming” might possibly call for comment. It is privately
carried on, of course, but--tell it not in Gath!--there is an officer’s
wife--there are so many officers’ wives!--but this one in particular,
more than the others, moves me to the presumption of a parody on the
Immortal Bard, thus:


     An officer’s wife had play-cards in her lap--
     And dealt and dealt. “What tricks!” quoth I!
     “They’re tricks, you bet!” the smiling cheat replied--
     “My husband is ‘on duty’ gone,
     And ‘green’ young subalterns are all my game,
     And till they’re drained of gold and silver, too,
     I’ll do, I’ll do, I’ll do!”


And she does “do.” She has found out the way to make those “green young
subalterns” pay her bills and ruin themselves. It is a thoroughly
up-to-date manner of spending the Sunday.

Country-house “week-end” parties are generally all bridge-parties.
They are all carefully selected, with an eye to the main chance. The
“play” generally begins on Saturday evening, and goes on all through
Sunday up to midnight. One woman, notorious for her insensate love of
gambling, lately took lessons in “cheating” at bridge before joining
her country-house friends. She came away heavier in purse by five
hundred pounds, but of that five hundred, one hundred and fifty had
been won from a foolish little girl of eighteen, known to be the
daughter of a very wealthy, but strict father. When the poor child
was made to understand the extent of her losses at bridge, she was
afraid to go home. So she purchased some laudanum “for the toothache,”
and tried to poison herself by swallowing it. Fortunately, she was
rescued before it was too late, and her Spartan “dad,” with tears of
joy in his eyes, paid the money she had lost at cards thankfully, as
a kind of ransom to Death. But she was never again allowed to visit
at that “swagger” house where she had been “rooked” so unmercifully.
And when we remember how fond Society is of bragging of its little
philanthropies, its “bazaars” and carefully-calculated “charities,” we
may, perhaps, wonder whether, among the list of good and noble deeds
it declares itself capable of, it would set its face against bridge,
and make “gambling-parties” once for all unfashionable and in “bad
form”? This would be true philanthropy, and would be more productive
of good than any amount of regular church attendance. For there is no
doubt that very general sympathy is accorded to people who find that
going to church is rather an irksome business. It is not as if they
were often taught anything wonderfully inspiring or helpful there. They
seldom have even the satisfaction of hearing the service read properly.
The majority of the clergy are innocent of all elocutionary art. They
read the finest passages of Scripture in the sing-song tone of a clerk
detailing the items of a bill. It is a soothing style, and quickly
induces sleep; but that is its only recommendation.

When not playing bridge, Society’s “Sunday observance” is motoring.
Flashing and fizzling all over the place, it rushes here, there, and
everywhere, creating infinite dust, smelling abominably, and looking
uglier than the worst demons in Dante’s “Inferno.” Beauty certainly
goes to the wall in a motor. The hideous masks, goggles, and caps
which help to make up the woman motorist’s driving gear, are enough
to scare the staunchest believer in the eternal attractiveness of the
fair sex, while the general get-up of the men is on a par with that of
the professional stoker or engine-driver. Nevertheless, no reasonable
woman ought to mind other women looking ugly if they like; while men,
of course, are always men, and “masters of the planet,” whether dirty
or clean. And no one should really object to the “motor craze,” seeing
that it takes so many useless people out of one’s immediate horizon
and scatters them far and wide over the surface of the earth. Society
uses Sunday as a special day for this “scattering,” and perhaps it
is doing itself no very great harm. It is getting fresh air, which
it needs; it is “going the pace,” which, in its fevered condition of
living fast, so as to die more quickly, is natural to it; and it is
seeing persons and places it never saw before in the way of country
nooks and old-fashioned roadside inns, and rustic people, who stare at
it with unfeigned amusement, and wonder “what the world’s a’-comin’
to!” Possibly it learns more in a motor drive through the heart of
rural England than many sermons in church could teach it. The only
thing one would venture to suggest is that in passing its Sundays in
this fashion, Society should respect the Sundays of those who still
elect to keep the seventh day as a day of rest. Fashionable motorists
might avoid dashing recklessly through groups of country people who
are peacefully wending their way to and from church. They might “slow
down.” They might take thoughtful heed of the little children who play
unguardedly about in many a village street. They might have some little
consideration for the uncertain steps of feeble and old persons who
are perchance blind or deaf, and who neither see the “motor” nor hear
the warning blast of its discordant horn. In brief, it would not hurt
Society to spend its Sundays with more thought for others than Itself.
For the bulk and mass of the British people--the people who _are_
Great Britain--still adhere to the sacred and blessed institution of a
“day of rest,” even if it be not a day of sermons. To thousands upon
thousands of toiling men and women, Sunday is still a veritable God’s
day, and we may thank God for it! Nay, more; we should do our very
best to keep it as “holy” as we can, if not by listening to sermons,
at least by a pause in our worldly concerns, wherein we may put a stop
on the wheels of work and consider within ourselves as to how and why
we are working. Sunday is a day when we should ask Nature to speak to
us and teach us such things as may only be mastered in silence and
solitude--when the book of poems, the beautiful prose idyll, or the
tender romance, may be our companion in summer under the trees, or
in winter by a bright fire--and when we may stand, as it were, for a
moment and take breath on the threshold of another week, bracing our
energies to meet with whatever that week may hold in store for us,
whether joy or sorrow. Few nations, however, view Sunday in this light.
On the Continent it has long been a day of mere frivolous pleasure--and
in America I know not what it is, never having experienced it. But the
British Sunday, apart from all the mockery and innuendo heaped upon it
by the wits and satirists of the present time and of bygone years, used
to be a strong and spiritually saving force in the national existence.
Dinner-parties, with a string band in attendance, and a Parisian
singer of the “café chantant” to entertain the company afterwards, were
once unknown in England on a Sunday. But such “Sabbath” entertainments
are quite ordinary now. The private house copies the public
restaurant--more’s the pity!

Nevertheless, though Society’s Sunday has degenerated into a day of
gambling, guzzling, and motoring in Great Britain, it is well to
remember that Society in itself is so limited as to be a mere bubble
on the waters of life--froth and scum, as it were, that rises to the
top, merely to be skimmed off and thrown aside in any serious national
crisis. The People are the life and blood of the nation, and to them
Sunday remains still a “day of rest,” though, perhaps, not so much as
in old time a day of religion. And that it is not so much a day of
religion is because so many preachers have failed in their mission.
They have lost grip. There is no cause whatever for their so losing it,
save such as lies within themselves. There has been no diminution in
the outflow of truth from the sources of Divine instruction, but rather
an increase. The wonders of the universe have been unfolded in every
direction by the Creator to His creature. There is everything for the
minister of God to say. Yet how little is said! “Feed my sheep!” was
the command of the Master. But the sheep have cropped all the old ways
of thought down to the bare ground, and their inefficient shepherds
now know not where to lead them, though their Lord’s command is as
imperative as ever. So the flock, being hungry, have broken down the
fences of tradition, and are scampering away in disorder to fresh
fields and pastures new. Society may be, and is, undoubtedly to blame
for its lax manner of treating religion and religious observances; but,
with all its faults, it is not so blameworthy as those teachers of the
Christian faith, whose lack of attention to its needs and perplexities
help to make it the heaven-scorning, God-denying, heart-sore, weary,
and always dissatisfied thing it is. Society’s Sunday is merely a
reflex of Society’s own immediate mood--the mood of killing time at all
costs, even to the degradation of its own honour, for want of something
better to do!




THE “STRONG” BOOK OF THE ISHBOSHETH


There are two trite sayings in common use with us all--one is:
“Circumstances alter cases,” which is English; the other is: “Autres
temps, autres mœurs,” which is French. But there lacks any similar
epigrammatic expression to convey the complete and curious change of
meaning, which by a certain occult literary process becomes gradually
attached to quite ordinary words of our daily speech. “Strong,” for
instance, used to mean strength. It means it still, I believe, in the
gymnasium. But in very choice literary circles it means “unclean.”
This is strange, but true. For some time past the gentle and credulous
public has remained in childlike doubt as to what was really implied
by a “strong” book. The gentle and credulous public has been under the
impression that the word “strong” used by the guides, philosophers, and
friends who review current fiction in the daily Press, meant a powerful
style, a vigorous grip, a brilliant way of telling a captivating and
noble story. But they have, by slow and painful degrees, found out
their mistake in this direction, and they know now that a “strong”
book means a nasty subject indelicately treated. Whereupon they are
beginning to “sheer off” any book labelled by the inner critical
faculty as “strong.” This must be admitted as a most unfortunate
fact for those who are bending all their energies upon the writing
of “strong” books, and who are wasting their powers on discussing
what they euphoniously term “delicate and burning subjects”; but it
is a hopeful and blessed sign of increasing education and widening
intellectual perception in the masses, who will soon by their sturdy
common sense win a position which is not to be “frighted with false
fire.” Congratulating the proprietors of _Great Thoughts_ on its
thousandth number, the sapient _Westminster Gazette_ lately chortled
forth the following lines: “A career such as our contemporary has
enjoyed, shows that the taste for good reading is wider than some
would have us believe. We wish _Great Thoughts_ continued success.”
O wise judge! O learned judge! The public taste for good reading is
only questioned when writers whom Thou dislikest are read by the base
million!

“Art,” says a certain M.A., “if it be genuine and sincere, tends ever
to the lofty and the beautiful. There is no rule of art more important
than the sense of modesty. Vice grows not a little by immodesty of
thought.” True. And immodesty of thought fulfils its mission in
the “strong” book, which alone succeeds in winning the applause of
that “Exclusive Set of Degenerates” known as the E.S.D. under the
Masonic Scriptural sign of ISHBOSHETH (laying particular emphasis on
the syllable between the “Ish” and the “eth,”) who manage to obtain
temporary posts on the ever-changeful twirling treadmill of the daily
press. The Ishbosheth singular is the man who praises the “strong”
book--the Ishbosheth in the plural are the Exclusive Set who are sworn
to put down Virtue and extol Vice. Hence the “strong” cult, also the
“virile.” This last excellent and expressive word has become seriously
maltreated in the hands of the Ishbosheth, and is now made answerable
for many sins which it did not originally represent. “Virile” is from
the Latin _virilis_, a male--virility is the state and characteristic
of the adult male. Applied to certain books, however, by the Ishbosheth
it will be found by the discerning public to mean coarse--rough--with
a literary “style” obtained by sprinkling several pages of prose with
the lowest tavern-oaths, together with the name of God, pronounced
“Gawd.” Anything written in that fashion is at once pronounced “virile”
and commands wide admiration from the Ishbosheth, particularly if it
should be a story in which women are depicted at the lowest kickable
depth of drab-ism to which men can drag them, while men are represented
as the suffering victims of their wickedness. This peculiar kind of
turncoat morality was, according to Genesis, instituted by Adam in
his cowardly utterance: “The woman tempted me,” as an excuse for his
own base greed; and it has apparently continued to sprout forth in
various of his descendants ever since that time, especially in the
community of the Ishbosheth. “Virility,” therefore, being the state and
characteristic of the adult male, or the adult Adam, means, according
to the Ishbosheth, men’s proper scorn for the sex of their mothers, and
an egotistical delight in themselves, united to a barbarous rejoicing
in bad language and abandoned morals. It does not mean this in decent
every-day life, of course; but it does in books--such books as are
praised by the Ishbosheth.

“I don’t want one of your ‘strong’ books,” said a customer at one of
the circulating libraries the other day. “Give me something I can read
to my wife without being ashamed.” This puts the case in a nutshell.
No clean-minded man can read the modern “strong” book praised by the
Ishbosheth and feel quite safe, or even quite manly in his wife’s
presence. He will find himself before he knows it mumbling something
about the gross and fleshly temptations of a deformed gentleman with
short legs; or he will grow hot-faced and awkward over the narrative
of a betrayed milkmaid who enters into all the precise details of her
wrongs with a more than pernicious gusto. It is true that he will
probably chance upon no worse or more revolting circumstances of human
life than are dished up for the general Improvement of Public Morals in
our halfpenny dailies; but he will realize, if he be a man of sense,
that whereas the divorce court and police cases in the newspaper are
very soon forgotten, the impression of a “strong” book, particularly if
the “strong” parts are elaborately and excruciatingly insisted upon,
lasts, and sometimes leaves tracks of indelible mischief on minds
which, but for its loathsome influence, would have remained upright
and innocent. Thought creates action. An idea is the mainspring of an
epoch. Therefore the corrupters of thought are responsible for corrupt
deeds in an individual or a nation. From a noble thought--from a
selfless pure ideal--what great actions spring! Herein should the
responsibility of Literature be realized. The Ishbosheth, with their
“strong” books, have their criminal part in the visible putrescence
of a certain section of society known as the “swagger set.” Perhaps
no more forcible illustration of the repulsion exercised by nature
itself to spiritual and literary disease could be furnished than by
the death of the French “realist” Zola. Capable of fine artistic work,
he prostituted his powers to the lowest grade of thought. From the
dust-hole of the frail world’s ignorance and crime he selected his
olla-podrida of dirty scrapings, potato-peelings, candle-ends, rank
fat, and cabbage water, and set them all to seethe in the fire of
his brain, till they emitted noxious poison, and suffocating vapours
calculated to choke the channels of every aspiring mind and idealistic
soul. Nature revenged herself upon him by permitting him to be likewise
asphyxiated--only in the most prosy and “realistic” manner. It was one
of those terribly grim jests which she is fond of playing off on those
who blaspheme her sacred altars. A certain literary aspirant hovering
on the verge of the circle of the Ishbosheth, complained the other day
of a great omission in the biography of one of his dead comrades of the
pen. “They should have mentioned,” he said, “that he allowed his body
to _swarm with vermin_!” This is true Ishbosheth art. Suppress the fact
that the dead man had good in him, that he might have been famous had
he lived, that he had some notably strong points in his character, but
_don’t_ forget, for Heaven’s sake, to mention the “vermin”! For the
Ishbosheth “cult” see nothing in a sunset, but much in a flea.

Hence when we read the criticism of a “strong” book, over the signature
of one of the Ishbosheth, we know what to expect. All the bad, low,
villainous and soiled side of sickly or insane human nature will be in
it, and nothing of the healthful or sound. For, to be vicious is to
be ill--to commit crime is to be mentally deformed--and the “strong”
book of the Ishbosheth only deals with phases of sickness and lunacy.
There are other “strong” books in the world, thank Heaven--strong
books which treat strongly of noble examples of human life, love
and endeavour--books like those of Scott and Dickens and Brontë and
Eliot--books which make the world all the better for reading them. But
they are not books admired of the Ishbosheth. And as the Ishbosheth
have their centres in the current press, they are not praised in the
newspapers. Binding as the union of the Printers is all over the
world, I suppose they cannot take arms against the Ishbosheth and
decline to print anything under this Masonic sign? If they could,
what a purification there would be--what a clean, refreshing world
of books--and perhaps of men and women! No more vicious heroes with
short legs; no more painfully-injured milkmaids; no more “twins,”
earthly or heavenly--while possibly a new _Villette_ might bud and
blossom forth--another _Fortunes of Nigel_, another brilliant _Vanity
Fair_--and books which contain wit without nastiness, tenderness
without erotics, simplicity without affectation, and good English
without slang, might once again give glory to literature. But this
millennium will not be till the “strong” book of the Ishbosheth ceases
to find a publisher, and the Ishbosheth themselves are seen in their
true colours, and fully recognized by the public to be no more than
they are--a mere group of low sensualists, who haunt Fleet Street
bars and restaurants, and who out of that sodden daily and nightly
experience get a few temporary jobs on the Press, and “pose” as a cult
and censorship of art. And fortunately the very phrase “strong book”
has become so much their own that it has now only to be used in order
to warn off the public from mere pot-house opinion.




ON THE MAKING OF LITTLE POETS


Great Poets discover themselves. Little Poets have to be “discovered”
by somebody else. Otherwise they would live and die in the shadow
of decent obscurity, unheard, unseen, unknown. And it is seriously
open to question whether their so living and dying would not be an
advantage to society in the abating of a certain measure of boredom.
Looking back upon the motley crowd of Little Poets who had their day of
“discovery” and “boom” at the very period when the thunderous voice of
the Muse at her grandest was shaking the air through the inspired lips
of Byron, Shelley and Keats, and noting to what dusty oblivion their
little names and lesser works are now relegated without regret, it is
difficult to understand why they were ever dragged from the respectable
retirement of common-place mediocrity by their critic-contemporaries.
Byron was scorned, Shelley neglected, and Keats killed by these same
critics;--neither of the three were “discovered” or “made.” Their
creation was not of man, but of their own innate God-given genius,
and, according to the usual fate attending such divine things, the
fastidious human _dilettante_ of their day would have none of them. He
set up his own verse-making Mumbo-Jumbo; and one Pye was Laureate. Pye
was Laureate,--yet Byron lived, and there was a reigning monarch in
England, strange as these assorted facts will seem to all intellectual
posterity. For a monarch’s word,--even a prince’s word,--must always
carry a certain weight of influence, and one asks wonderingly how,
under such circumstances, that word came to be left unsaid? No voice
from the Throne called the three greatest geniuses of the era to
receive any honour due to their rare gifts and quality. On the contrary
they were cast out as unvalued rubbish from their native land, and
the Little Poets had their way. Pye continued to write maudlin rhymes
unmolested, never dreaming that the only memory we should keep of him
or of his twaddle, would be the one scathing line of the banished Byron:


     Better to err with Pope than shine with Pye!


And feeble penny whistles played trumpery tunes to the languid votaries
of “cultchaw” in those days, and pennywhistle verse was voted “classic”
and supreme; but ever and anon the Nation turned a listening ear across
the seas and caught the music made by its outlawed singers,--music
it valued even then, and treasures now among its priceless and
imperishable glories. For the Nation knows what true Poetry is,--and no
“discoverer” will ever force it to accept a tallow candle for a star.

The gulf between Great Poets and Little is a wide one,--wider than
that which yawned between Lazarus in heaven and Dives in hell. The
Great Poet is moved by an inspiration which he himself cannot analyse,
and in which neither the desire of money nor the latent hope of fame
have the chiefest part. He sings simply because he must sing. He does
not labour at it, piecing his thoughts and words together with the
tardy and tame patience of a worker in mosaics, for though such exact
execution be admirable in mosaic-work, it is dull and lifeless in
poetry. Colour, fire, music, passion, and intense, glowing vitality are
the heritage of the Great Poet; and when the torrent of unpremeditated
love-song, battle-chant, dirge and prophecy pours from his lips, the
tired world slackens its pace to listen, and listening, silently crowns
him Laureate in its heart of hearts, regardless of Prime Minister or
Court Chamberlain. But the Little Poet is not able so to win attention;
he cannot sing thus “wildly well” because he lacks original voice.
He can only trim a sorry pipe of reed and play weak echoes thereon;
derivative twists of thought and borrowed fancies caught up from the
greater songs already ringing through the centuries. And when he
first begins piping in this lilliputian fashion he is generally very
miserable. He pipes “for pence; Ay me, how few!” Nobody listens; people
are too much engrossed with their own concerns to care about echoes.
Their attention can only be secured by singing them new songs that will
stir their pulses to new delights. The too-tootling of the Little Poet,
therefore, would never be noticed at all, even by way of derision,
unless he went down on all-fours and begged somebody to “discover” him.
The “discoverer” in most cases is a Superannuated-literary-gentleman,
who has tried his own hand at poetry and failed ignominiously.
Incapacity to do any good work of one’s own frequently creates a
thirsty desire to criticize the work of other people; thus, in the
intervals of his impotent rage at the success of the deserving, the
Superannuated, resolved to push himself into notice somehow, takes to
“discovering” Little Poets. It is his poor last bid for fame; a final
forlorn effort to get his half-ounce of talent to the front by tacking
it on to some new name which he thinks (and he is quite alone in the
idea) may by the merest chance in the world, like a second-rate horse,
win a doubtful race. To admire any Great Poet who may happen to exist
among us, is no part of the Superannuated’s programme. He ignores Great
Poets generally, fearing lest the mere mention of their names should
eclipse his dwarfish nurslings.

Now the public, mistakenly called fools, are perfectly aware of the
Superannuated. They see his signature affixed to many of the Little
Poets Booms, and ask each other with smiling tolerance, “What has he
done?” Nothing. “Oh! Then how does he know?” Ah, that is his secret! He
thinks he knows; and he wants you, excellent Fool-Public, to believe he
thinks he knows! And, under the pleasing delusion that you always have
your Fool’s Cap on, and never take it off under any circumstances, he
“discovers” Mr. Podgers for you. Who is Mr. Podgers? A poet. If we are
to credit the Superannuated, he is “a new star on the literary horizon,
of the first magnitude.” The “first magnitude”!--the public shakes its
caps and bells in amused scepticism. Another Shelley? Another Byron?
These were of the “first magnitude,” and shall we thank a bounteous
heaven for one more such as these? No, no, nothing of the sort, says
the Superannuated with indignation, for it is high time you put this
sort of Shelley-Byron stuff behind you. Mr. Swinburne has distinctly
said that “Byron was no poet.” Learn wisdom, therefore, and turn from
Byron to Podgers. He has written a little book, has Podgers, for which
those who desire to possess it must pay a sum out of all proportion to
its size. What shall we find in this so-little book? Anything to make
our hearts beat in more healthful and harmonious tune? No. Nothing
of this in Podgers. Nothing, in fact, of any kind in Podgers which
we have not heard before. There are a few lines that we remember as
derived from Wordsworth, and one stanza seems to us like a carefully
transposed bit of Tennyson;--but for anything absolutely new in thought
or in treatment we search in vain. Unless we make exception for a
set of verses which are a tribute to the art of Log-Rolling, namely
Podgers’s “Ode” to Podgers’s favouring critic. We confess this to be
somewhat of a novelty, and we begin to pity Podgers. He must have
fallen very low to write (and publish) an “Ode” to the Superannuated,
his chief flatterer on the Press, and he must be very short-sighted if
he imagines that action is a millstone _without_ a hole in it. And so,
despite the loud eulogies of the Superannuated (who is naturally proud
to be made the subject of any “Ode” however feeble) we do not purchase
Podgers’s book, though it is urged upon us as being a “limited”
edition. But the Superannuated is not herein baffled. If, he says,
if you are so asinine, so crass, so dull and dense of comprehension
as to reject this marvellous, this classic Podgers, what say you to
Stodgers? Stodgers is a “young” poet (forty-five last birthday),
entirely free from “manner” and manners. He has resorted to the last
and lowest method employed by Little Poets for obtaining temporary
notoriety, namely,--outraging decency. Coarseness and blasphemy are
the prevailing themes of his verse, but to the Superannuated these
grave blemishes constitute “power.” A “strong” line is a lewd line; a
“masterful” stanza contains a prurient suggestion. It suits the purpose
of the Superannuated to compare his two “discoveries,” Podgers and
Stodgers, and to work them against each other in those quarters of the
Press he controls, like the “toy millers” one buys for children. It is
a case of “Podgers come up and Stodgers come down,” as fits his humour
and digestion. Meanwhile the vital test of the whole matter is that
notwithstanding all this energetic “hawking about” of the Little Poets
by the Superannuated, neither Podgers nor Stodgers _sell_. Everything
is done to secure for them this desired result; unavailingly. And it
is not as if they came out in a “common” way, Podgers and Stodgers. No
publishing-firm with a simple name such as Messrs. Smith or Brown would
suit the Little Poets. They must come out singularly, and apart from
others. So they elect a publisher who, as it were, puts up a sign, as
though he were a Tavern. “Published at the Dragon’s Mouth” or “At the
Sign of the Flagon” would seem to be more convincing than “Published by
Messrs. So and So.” Now Podgers’s little book has a fanciful title-page
stating that it is published at the “Goose and Gridiron.” Stodgers,
we find, bursts upon the world at “The Blue Boar.” There is something
very delusive about all this. A flavour of ale and mulled wine
creeps insidiously into the air, and we are moved to yearn for good
warm drinks, whereas we only get indifferent cold verse. Now if the
proprietors of the “Goose and Gridiron” and the “Blue Boar” would only
sell inspiring liquids instead of uninspired rhymes, how their trade
would improve! No longer would they bend, lean and furrowed, over their
account-books--no longer would they have to scheme and puzzle over the
“making” of Little Poets; because it must not be imagined that the
Superannuated “discoverer” is the only one concerned in the business.
“Goose and Gridiron” and “Blue Boar” have to deal in many small tricks
of trade to compass it. Of course it is understood that the Little
Poets get no money out of their productions. What they stipulate for
with “Blue Boar” and likewise with “Goose and Gridiron” is a “hearing.”
This “hearing” is obtained variously. Podgers got it in this way, as
followeth: His verses, which had appeared from time to time in Sunday
papers and magazines, were issued in a “limited edition.” Such “limited
edition” was at once dispersed among booksellers in different parts of
the country “on sale or return,” and while thus doubtfully awaiting
purchasers, “Goose and Gridiron” tipped the trade-wink and perhaps
something else more substantial besides, to the Superannuated,--who
straightway seized his pen and wrote: “We hear that the first edition
of Mr. Podgers’s poems is exhausted, and that original copies are
already at a premium.” This done, and “passed” through many papers,
the publisher followed it up with an advertisement to the effect that
“The first edition of Mr. Podgers’s poems being exhausted, a Second
will be ready in a few days.” And here, it may as well be said for
the rectitude of “Goose and Gridiron,” things came to a standstill.
Because the Little Poets seldom get beyond a second edition. When
Podgers’s first editions came back unsold from the provinces (as they
did), attempts were made to dispose of them at fancy prices as a last
resource,--such attempts naturally ending in disaster. The times are
too hard, and people have too much to do with their money to part with
any of it for first editions of Podgers or Stodgers. The public is a
very shrewd one, moreover, and is not to be “taken in” by gnat-rhymers
dancing up and down for an hour in the “discoverer’s” artificial
sunbeams. And the Superannuated, in his eager desire to assert himself
as an oracular personage, forgets one very important fact, and this is,
that being a Nobody he cannot be accepted as warrant for a Somebody.
The public is not his child; he cannot whip it into admiring Mr.
Podgers, or coerce its judgment respecting Mr. Stodgers. Its ways
are wilful, and it has a ridiculous habit (considering what a Fool
the critic imagines it to be) of preferring its own opinion to that
of the Superannuated. It is capable, it thinks, what with Compulsory
Education and the rest of it, of making its own choice. And on the
whole it prefers the Great Poet,--the man who scorns to be “discovered”
by an inferior intellect, and who makes his own way independently and
with a grand indifference to the squabbling of Log-rollers. He is not
“made”; he forms part of the country’s blood and life; he chants the
national thought in haunting rhythm as did the prophet bards of old;
he, careless of “pence,” praise or fame, does so mix himself with his
land’s history, that he becomes, as it were the very voice of the age
in which he lives, and the Superannuated may ignore him as he will,
he cannot get him out of the nation’s heart when he has once got in.
But of the feeble, absurdly conceited tribe of Little Poets who come
jostling one upon another nowadays in such a puling crowd, piping out
their wretchedly small personalities in versed pessimism or coarse
metaphor,--men “made” by the Tavern-publisher and the Superannuated
Failure;--we have had enough of these, and more than enough. Too much
good paper, good ink and good binding are wasted on their totally
undesired productions. Life with us now is lived at too hard and too
difficult a pace for any one to need poetry that is _only_ verse.
Hearts break every day in the truest sense of that sentimental phrase;
brains reel into insanity and the darkness of suicide; and it is no
Little Poet’s personal pangs about “pence” and such trifles, that can,
like David’s harp of old, soothe or dismiss the dark spirit brooding
over the latter-day Saul. It is the Great Poet we care for, whose
singing-soul mystically comprehends our unuttered thoughts of love or
glory; who chants not only his pains, but ours; not his joy, so much as
the whole world’s joy. Such a man needs no “discoverer” to prove his
existence; he is self-evident. When we grow so purblind as to need a
still blinder Mole to point us out the sun, then, but not till then
shall we require the assistance of the Superannuated to “discover” what
we understand by a Poet. At present we are actively conscious both of
the orb of day, and the true quality of genius; and though the Poet we
choose for ourselves and silently acknowledge as worthy of all honour,
may not be, and seldom is, the recommended favourite of a clique, we
are fully aware of him, and show our love and appreciation by setting
his book among our household gods. No “limited edition” will suffice
for such a man; we need to have his poems singing about us wherever we
go. For the oft-repeated truth is to-day as true as ever,--that the
Great Poet is “born,” and never has been and never will be “made.”




THE PRAYER OF THE SMALL COUNTRY M.P.

WHICH HE PRAYETH DAILY


O thou Especial Little God of Parliaments and Electors, with whom the
greater God of the Universe has nothing whatever to do!--I beseech Thee
to look upon me, Thy chosen servant, with a tolerant and favourable Eye!

Consider with Leniency the singular and capricious Chance which has
enabled me to become a Member of the Government, and grant me Thy
protection, so that my utter Incapacity for the Post may never be
discovered! Enable me, I implore Thee, to altogether dispense with
the assistance of a certain Journalist and Press-Reporter in the
composition of my Speeches! His Terms are high, and I am not sure of
his Discretion!

Impart unto me by spiritual telegraphy such Knowledge of the general
Situation of Affairs that I may be able to furnish forth an occasional
Intelligent Remark to the farmers of this Constituency, whose Loyalty
to the Government is as firm as their Trust in the Power of Beer!
Give me the grace of such shallow Profundity and Pretension as
shall convince Rustic minds of my complete Superiority to them in
matters concerning their Interest and Welfare; and teach me to use
their Simplicity for the convenient furtherance of my own Cunning!
Fill me with such necessary and becoming Arrogance as shall make me
overbearingly insolent to Persons of Intellect, while yet retaining
that sleek Affability which shall cause me to appear a Fawning Flunkey
to Persons of Rank! Enable me to so condescendingly patronize the
Electors who gave me their Majority that it shall seem I was returned
through Merit only, and not through Bribes and Beer! And mercifully
defend me, O Beneficent little Deity, from all possibility of ever
being called upon to address the House! I am no speaker,--and even if I
were, I have no Ideas whereon to hang a fustian sentence! Thou Knowest,
All-Knowing-One, that I have not so much as an Opinion, save that it
is good for me, in respect of Social Advantage, to write M.P. after
my name! And surely Thou dost also know that I have paid Two Thousand
Pounds for the purchase of this small portion of the Alphabet, making
One Thousand Pounds per letter, which may humbly be submitted to Thee,
O Calculating Ruler of Parliamentary Elections, as somewhat dear!

But I have accepted these Conditions and paid the Sum without
murmuring; therefore of Thy goodness, be pleased to spare me from the
utterance of even one word in the presence of my peers, concerning any
Matter for the Advancement of Which I have been elected! For lo,--if
I said as much as “Yea,” it might be ill-advised; and yet again, if I
said “Nay,” it might be ill-timed! Inasmuch as I am compelled to rely
on the Journalist and Press-Reporter before mentioned, for whatsoever
knowledge of matters political I possess, and it is just possible
that he might,--through an extra dose of whisky-soda,--mislead me
by erroneous information! O Lord of Press-Agencies and Grub Street
Eating-Houses, if it be possible unto Thee, relieve me of this Man!
He charges more, so I am credibly informed, per Hundred Words than
any other Inventor of Original Eloquence in the pay of the Unlettered
and Inarticulate of the House! And it is much to be feared that he
does not always keep his own Counsel! Wherefore, gracious Deity, I
would be Released with all convenient Speed from the Exercise of
his Power! Rather than be constantly compelled to rely upon this
Journalistic Wretch for Advice and Instruction, it will more conduce
to my Comfort,--though possibly to my Fatigue,--to commit to Memory
such portions of long-forgotten speeches spoken by Defunct Members of
the House in the Past, as may be found suitable to the present needs
of the Rural Population. The Corn-growing and Cattle-breeding Electors
will not know from what Sources I derive my Inspiration, and the Editor
of the Local Newspaper has not yet taken a degree in Scholarship.
Moreover, the Dead are happily unable to send in any Claim for Damages
against the Theft of their Ideas, which are as free to Independent
Pilferers as the Original Plots of New and Successful Romances are
free to the Dramatizing Robbers in the Stage-Purlieus, thanks to the
Admirable Attitude of Dignified Indolence assumed by that Government to
which I, one Fool out of Many, have the honour to belong!

Finally, O Beneficent Lilliputian Deity which governeth matters
Parliamentary,--grant me such a sufficient amount of highly-respectable
Mendacity as shall enable me to pass successfully for what I am not, at
least, so far as Society in the Country is concerned! Fully aware am I,
O Lord, that a Simulation of Ability will not always meet with approval
in Town, though it has been occasionally known to do so! Therefore I am
well content to sit in the House as one MUM, thus representing through
myself an inaudible County! But in the County itself it shall seem
to the Uninitiated that my thoughts are too deep for speech; while I
retain in my own mind the knowledge of the Fact that my Humbug is too
great for Expression!

To Thee, gentle yet capricious Deity, I commend all my Desires,
praying Thee to keep the people whom I represent as Dumb and Inert as
myself in matters concerning their own Welfare, for if they should
chance to consider the Situation by the light of Common Sense,
and me by the shrewd Appreciation of a Native Wit, it might occur
to them to prefer a Man rather than a Wooden-headed Nonentity to
Proclaim their Existence to the King’s faithful Commons! Wherefore,
at the next General Election I should lose my Seat,--which would
be Disagreeable to me personally, as well as a Cause of Rage in my
Wife, to whom my present Condition of a Parliamentary Microbe is
much more important and advantageous than it is to the Country! And
Thou knowest, O Lord, that when my Wife is moved by the Impetuous
Persuasion of a difficult Temper, it is necessary for me, by reason
of her Superior Height, Size, and Aggressiveness, to retire from the
domestic Fighting-ground, considerably worsted in the unequal Combat.
Protect me, merciful Deity, from her Tongue!--which is as a Sword to
slay all thoughts of Peace! And, concerning the accursed, ubiquitous
Journalist-Reporter-Paragraphist-Correspondent-Attached-to-all-Newspapers
Man, who, for my sins, wrote my “speech to the Electors” at a high
charge, and agreed,--and therefore expects,--to write all my other
public utterances on the same terms, I beseech Thee, when he next waits
upon me with his Bill, ready to Counsel or to Command, grant me the
Strength and Courage to tell a more barefaced Lie than is habitual to
me, and to boldly say that I can do Without him!


AMEN!




THE THANKSGIVING OF THE SMALL COUNTRY M.P’s WIFE,

WHICH SHE OFFERETH WEEK-END-LY


To Thee, O Bland and Blessëd Deity of Surplus Cash and Social
Advancement, whose favours are never bestowed upon the Poor or the
Wise, but only on the Rich and the Foolish, I give praise, honour and
glory!

I thank Thee that Thou hast made of that Supreme Ass, my Husband, a
Member of the Government, so that, despite his utter Lack of Wit and
Hopeless Incompetency, he may at least pass muster for having Brains in
a particularly Brainless Constituency!

I acknowledge Thy mercy and goodness in permitting that for the
moderate cost of Two Thousand Pounds and upwards,--a sum not greatly
in excess of my dressmaker’s annual bill,--I may set my foot on the
two dumb and prostrate Letters of the Alphabet now attached to my said
Husband’s new calling and Election, and may mount thereon to those
heights of County Society where, ever since I was born I have eagerly
thirsted to be! For though County Society be often duller than the
fabled Styx, nevertheless the leaden weight of its Approval is as
necessary to my special comfort and welfare as the Gilded chain of
Office is to the swelling chest of a Provincial Mayor. Thou knowest,
O little Lord of Communities Narrow, Parochial and Politic, that I am
called, even by the Profanest of Press-Reporters, “a fine figure of a
woman,” and that I am deserving of Public Notice and Commendation, not
only for my Physical Attractions, but for my Social Qualifications,
which, despite the fact that Fate has wedded me to a Fool, have enabled
me to successfully represent the said Fool to his bovine Electors as
an Intelligent Personality! Great is the Tact which is needed to palm
off a Sparrow for an Eagle, a Mouse for an Elephant, or a Donkey for
a Statesman! But I swear to Thee, O Thou gracious Little Neptune who
ruleth that Limited Ocean called the “Society Swim” that I am equal
to all this and more! Thou seest me as I am, a Fashionable Feminine
Insincerity! Thou beholdest the subtle cleverness of my Social Smile,
which radiates sweetly upon the faces of such persons as I conceive
may be useful in Election times, but which fades into a Supercilious
Sneer when I discover, as I often do, that many of these persons are
unblushingly “of no political party,” and have no interest whatever in
keeping my Husband in His Seat! Now if my Husband were not in His Seat,
I should become that most deplorable of human beings, a Provincial
Nonentity! Hence arises my natural and lawful Desire that in His Seat
my Husband shall remain, inasmuch as were he left without a Seat, I
should be left without a “Set”!

But thanks be unto Thee, O Thou amiable and complaisant God of the
British Social Status, there seems to be at present no cause for
alarm that the Rustics whom my Husband, with unintelligent dumbness
represents in the House of Commons will ever Rise! Chiefly inspired
as they are by Drugged Beer, it is safe to presume that they will
not easily awaken from their Public-House Torpor, or in a species of
vulgar “horse-play” pull my Husband’s seat from under him,--even as
a lubberly child pulls away a chair from the Unsuspecting Visitor
who would fain sit down upon it,--and so precipitate my Husband
into the unenviable rank of Unimportant Provincials! I myself am
ready to guarantee,--always with Thy support, O Favourer of Paid
Parliamentary Press-Puffery,--that so dire a Catastrophe as this shall
not happen! For My weight,--which is both materially and mentally
Considerable,--would have to be thrown into the Balance,--whereby
the tottering Seat, even if partially overthrown, would, and
needs Must,--under the force of my impetuous Clutch,--regain the
Perpendicular!

Being by unredeemed nature a Stupid Woman, I acknowledge freely and
with gratitude Thy Omnipotent Guidance in Matters purely Snobbish! I
praise and bless Thee for showing me the quickest way out of Things
Intellectual into Things Conventional! I thank Thee for Thy unfailing
assistance afforded to me in the beaten paths of County Flunkeydom,
wherein I walk with virtuous circumspection, taking care to leave my
impressive Visiting-Cards and likewise those of my Husband, on Houses
only, and never on People! For People may be dangerous acquaintances,
while Houses never are. A Family Residence is always more respectable
than a Family!

I give Thee glory that I am made of such stubborn Flesh and Quality as
never to recognize that any other Woman exists who, by the Inconvenient
Attributes of Either Beauty, Wit or Intelligence, deserves to be
considered my Superior, and that when any such Intrusive and Obtrusive
Female is accidentally forced upon my Notice, I have the good sense
to diplomatically ignore Her. I am gratefully conscious that the
Meaningless Insipidity of my Manner has favourably impressed the
Uneducated Majority of my Husband’s Constituents. And also, that having
once obtained their Unreasoning Votes, their Bucolic Lethargy is such,
that I need do little further to retain their Credulous Admiration save
to put in an Occasional Well-Dressed Appearance at a “local” Bazaar,
or Charity Ball. Concerning any aims or hopes they may, in their
blundering Dulness, have ever entertained towards the Betterment of
their Condition, and the Representation of these Addle-pated desires to
His Majesty’s Government, I am as Profoundly Indifferent as my Husband
is Voluntarily Ignorant. For, as the larger number of the Faithful
Commons are aware, no Act is more fatal to the Social Prestige and
County Influence of a Member of the House, than that he should, when in
office, fulfil the Rash Promises made to his Electors during a Critical
state of the Poll! Inasmuch as the only Reasonable object to be
attained by the Purchase of the Letters M. and P. is the Betterment of
One’s Self and One’s Social Position on the lines of such Conventional
Hypocrisies as are agreeable to the Best County Houses. For the taking
of any bold or conspicuous part in any National Matter of Interest or
Importance has long been sagaciously avoided by every County Member
who desires to retain His Seat. And that one Man should do what his
Colleagues dare not attempt, would be a Heroism which, thanks unto
Thee, O Prudent Presiding Deity of Grandmotherly Westminster, is
fortunately not to be expected of my Husband!

Finally I thank Thee, O Wise and All-Discerning, for the Gracious
Consolation which Thou hast imparted unto me in the fact that though my
Husband is the Embodiment of county Vacuity, the Majority of the King’s
Faithful Commons are as Vacuous as He! For, as in the multitude of Ants
in an Anthill, One insect more industrious or intelligent than the
rest is not easily discovered, even so, in the goodly array of Stupid
Members, the Stupidest of them all may conveniently sit in his Seat
without public Comment.

And for the Constant Enjoyment of my own Admitted Position
among the Tea-Drinking, Fox-Hunting and Bucolic _élite_ of the
Neighbourhood,--for the graceful Ease with which I assume to be what
I am not, by reason of the Two Letters attached to my Husband’s
Name, which gives much more importance to Me than to Him,--and for
the general comfortable Self-Assertiveness in which I live and
move and have my being, I bless Thee, O Potent little Deity of the
Polling-Booth, and acknowledge Thy Manifold Mercies! May the Seat of my
Husband continue firm in Thy Sight, unmoved by any Popular Caprice of
the Vulgar, until such time as my eldest Hopeful Son, the very pattern
of His Father, shall slip into it Unopposed after Him, and so preserve
in those Unsophisticated Rural Districts whereby we are surrounded, the
Unblemished Honour of a Unique Reputation for Highly Educated Political
Incompetence in this Advanced and Enlightened Age!


AMEN!




THE VANISHING GIFT


The unseen rulers of human destiny are, on the whole, very kindly
Fates. They appear beneficently prone to give us mortals much more
than we deserve. Gifts of various grace and value are showered upon
us incessantly through our life’s progress,--gifts for which we are
too often ungrateful, or which we fail to appreciate at their true
worth. Apart from the pleasures of the material senses which we share
in common with our friends and fellows of the brute creation, the more
delicate and exquisite emotions of the mind are ministered to with
unfailing and fostering care. Music--Poetry, Art in all its brilliant
and changeful phases,--these things are offered for the delectation of
our thoughts and the refinement of our tastes; but the most priceless
boon of the Immortals is the talisman which alone enables us to
understand the beauty of life at its highest, and the perfection of
ideals at their best. I mean Imagination,--that wonderful spiritual
faculty which is the source of all great creative work in Art and
Literature. Some call it “Inspiration”; others, the Divine Fire; but
whatever its nature or quality, there is good cause to think--and to
fear--that it is gradually dwindling down and disappearing altogether
from the world of to-day.

The reasons for this are not very far to seek. We are living in
an age of feverish unrest and agitation. If we could picture a
twentieth century Satan appearing before the Almighty under the
circumstances described in the Book of Job, to answer the question,
“Whence comest thou?”--the same reply would suit not only his, but
our condition--“From going to and fro in the earth, and wandering up
and down within it.” We are always going to and fro in these days. We
are forever wandering up and down. Few of us are satisfied to remain
long in the same place, among the same surroundings--and in this way
the foundations of home life,--formerly so noble and firm a part of
our national strength--are being shaken and disorganized. A very
great majority of us appear to be afflicted with the chronic disease
of Hurry, which generally breeds a twin ailment--Worry. We have no
time for anything somehow. We seem to be always under the thrall of
an invisible policeman, commanding us to “Move on!” And we do move
on, like the tramps we are becoming. Moreover, we have decided that
we cannot get over the ground quickly enough on the limbs with which
Nature originally provided us--so we spin along on cycles, and dash
about on motor cars. And it is confidently expected that by-and-by
the mere earth will not be good enough for us, and that we shall
“scorch” through the air--when a great change may be looked for in
house accommodation. People will return, it is said, to the early
cave dwellings, in order to avoid the massacre likely to be caused by
tumbling air-ships over which the captains have lost control.

There is something humourous in all this modern hurry-skurry; something
almost grotesque in this desire for swift movement--this wish to save
time and to stint work;--but there is something infinitely pathetic
about it as well. It is as if the present Period of the world’s
civilization felt itself growing old--as if, like an individual human
unit, it knew itself to be past its prime and drawing nigh to death,
as if,--with the feeble restlessness of advancing age, it were seeking
to cram as much change and amusement as possible into the little time
of existence left to it. Two of the most notable signs of such mental
and moral decay are, a morbid craving for incessant excitement, and a
disinclination to think. It is quite a common thing nowadays to hear
people say, “Oh, I have no time to think!”--and they seem to be more
proud than ashamed of their loss of mental equilibrium. But it is very
certain that where there is no time to think, there is less time to
imagine--and where there is neither thought nor imagination, creative
work of a high and lasting quality is not possible.

We, in our day, are fortunate in so far that we are the inheritors
of the splendid work accomplished in the youth and prime of all that
we know of civilization. No doubt there were immense periods beyond
our ken, in which the entire round of birth, youth, maturity, age and
death, was fulfilled by countless civilizations whose histories are
unrecorded--but we can only form the faintest guess at this, through
the study of old dynasties which, ancient as they are, may perhaps be
almost modern compared to the unknown empires which have utterly passed
away beyond human recovery. But if we care to examine the matter, we
shall find among all nations, that as soon as a form of civilization
has emerged from barbarism, like a youth emerging from childhood, it
has entered on its career with a glad heart and a poetic soul,--full of
ideals, and richly endowed with that gift of the gods--Imagination. It
has invariably expressed itself as being reverently conscious of the
Highest source of all creation; and its utterance through all its best
work and achievement can be aptly summed up in Wordsworth’s glorious
lines:--


     Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting--
       The Soul that rises with us, our life’s star
     Hath had elsewhere its setting,
       And cometh from afar,--
          Not in entire forgetfulness,
          And not in utter nakedness,
          But trailing clouds of glory do we come,
          From God who is our home!


While these “trailing clouds of glory” still cling to the soul, the
limits of this world,--the mere dust and grime of material things,--do
not and cannot satisfy it; it must penetrate into a realm which is
of its own idea and innate perception. There it must itself create a
universe, and find expression for its higher thought. To this resentful
attitude of the soul against mere materialism, we owe all art, all
poetry, all music. Every great artistic work performed outside the
needs of material and physical life may be looked upon as a spiritual
attempt to break open the close walls of our earthly prison-house and
let a glimpse of God’s light through.

As a matter of fact, everything we possess or know of to-day, is
the visible outcome of a once imagined possibility. It has been
very grandly said that “the Universe itself was once a dream in the
mind of God.” So may we say that every scientific law, every canon
of beauty--every great discovery--every splendid accomplishment was
once a dream in the mind of man. All the religions of the world, with
their deep, beautiful, grand or terrific symbols of life, death and
immortality, have had their origin in the instinctive effort of the
Soul to detach itself from the mere earthly, and to imagine something
better. In the early days, this strong aspiration of humanity towards
a greater and more lasting good than its own immediate interest,
was displayed in the loftiest and purest conceptions of art. The
thoughts of the “old-world” period are written in well-nigh indelible
characters. The colossal architecture of the temples of ancient
Egypt--and that marvellous imaginative creation, the Sphinx, with its
immutable face of mingled scorn and pity--the beautiful classic forms
of old Greece and Rome--these are all visible evidences of spiritual
aspiration and endeavour,--moreover, they are the expression of a
broad, reposeful strength,--a dignified consciousness of power. The
glorious poetry of the Hebrew Scriptures--the swing and rush of Homer’s
Iliad,--the stately simplicity and profundity of Plato,--these also
belong to what we know of the youth of the world. And they are still
a part of the world’s most precious possessions. We, in our day, can
do nothing so great. We have neither the imagination to conceive such
work, nor the calm force necessary to execute it. The artists of a
former time laboured with sustained and tireless, yet tranquil energy;
we can only produce imitations of the greater models with a vast amount
of spasmodic hurry and clamour. So, perchance, we shall leave to future
generations little more than an echo of “much ado about nothing.” For,
truly, we live at present under a veritable scourge of mere noise. No
king, no statesman, no general, no thinker, no writer, is allowed to
follow the course of his duty or work without the shrieking comments
of all sorts and conditions of uninstructed and misguided persons, and
under such circumstances it is well to remember the strong lines of our
last great poet Laureate:--


     Step by step we gain’d a freedom, known to Europe, known to all,--
     Step by step we rose to greatness,--through the _tonguesters_
       we may fall!


But our chief disablement for high creative work,--and one that is
particularly noticeable at this immediate period of our history, is, as
I have said, the “vanishing of the gift”--the lack of Imagination. To
be wanting in this, is to be wanting in the first element of artistic
greatness. The poet, the painter, the sculptor, or the musician must
be able to make a world of his own and live in it, before he can make
one for others. When he has evolved such a world out of his individual
consciousness, and has peopled it with the creations of his fancy,
he can turn its “airy substance” into reality for all time. For the
things we call “imaginative” are often far more real than what we call
“realism.” All that we touch, taste and see, we call “real.” Now we
cannot touch, taste or see Honour--but surely it is real! We cannot
weigh out Courage in a solidified parcel--yet it is an actual thing.
So with Imagination--it shows us what we may, if we choose, consider
“the baseless fabric of a vision”--but which often proves as real and
practical in its results as Honour and Courage. Shakespeare’s world is
real;--so real that there are not wanting certain literary imposters
who grudge him its reality and strive to dispossess him of his own.
Walter Scott’s world is real--so real, that a shrine has been built for
him in Edinburgh, crowded with sculptured figures of men and women,
most of whom never existed, save in his teeming fancy. What a tribute
to the power of Imagination is the beautiful monument in the centre of
Princes Street, with all the forms evoked from one great mind, lifted
high above us, who consider ourselves “real” people! And now the lesser
world of thought is waiting for the discovery of a Cryptogram in the
Waverley Novels, which shall prove that King George the Fourth wrote
them with the assistance of Scott’s game-keeper, Tom Purdie,--and that
his Majesty gave Scott a baronetcy on condition that he should never
divulge the true authorship! For, according to the narrow material
limits of some latter-day minds, no one man could possibly have written
Shakespeare’s Plays. Therefore it may be equally argued that, as there
is as much actual work, and quite as many characters in the Waverley
Novels as in the plays of Shakespeare, they could not all have emanated
from the one brain of Sir Walter Scott. Come forward then with a
“Waverley cryptogram,” little mean starvelings of literature who would
fain attempt to prove a man’s work is not his own! There are sure to be
some envious fools always ready to believe that the great are not so
great,--the heroic not so heroic, and that after all, they, the fools,
may be wiser than the wisest men!

In very truth, one of the worst signs of the vanishing of the gift of
Imagination in these days is the utter inability of the majority of
modern folk to understand its value. The creative ease and exquisite
happiness of an imaginative soul which builds up grand ideals of life
and love and immortality with less effort than is required for the
act of breathing, seems to be quite beyond their comprehension. And
so--unfortunately it often follows that what is above them they try to
pull down,--and what is too large for them to grasp, they endeavour
to bind within their own narrow ring of experience. The attempt is
of course useless. We cannot get the planet Venus to serve us as a
lamp on our dinner table. We cannot fit the eagle into a sparrow’s
nest. But some people are always trying to do this sort of thing.
And when they find they cannot succeed, they fall into a fit of the
spleen, and revile what they cannot emulate. There is no surer sign of
mental and moral decadence than this grudging envy of a great fame.
For the healthy mind rejoices in the recognition of genius wherever
or whenever it may be discovered, and has a keen sense of personal
delight in giving to merit all its due. Hero-worship is a much finer
and more invigorating emotion than hero-slander. The insatiate
desire which is shown by certain writers nowadays, to pull down the
great reputations of the past, destroy old traditions, and cheapen
noble attainment, resembles a sudden outbreak of insane persons who
strive to smash everything within their reach. It is in its way a
form of Imagination,--but Imagination diseased and demoralized. For
Imagination, like all other faculties of the brain, can become sickly
and perverted. When it is about to die it shows--in common with
everything else in that condition,--signs of its dissolution. Such
signs of feebleness and decay are everywhere visible in the world at
the present time. They are shown in the constant output of decadent
and atheistical literature--in the decline of music and the drama from
noble and classic forms to the repulsive “problem” play and the comic
opera--in the splashy daubing of good canvas called “impressionist”
painting--in the acceptance, or passive toleration, of the vilest
doggerel verse as “poetry”--and in the wretched return to the lowest
forms of ignorance displayed in the “fashionable” craze for palmistry,
clairvoyance, crystal-gazing, and sundry other quite contemptible
evidences of foolish credulity concerning the grave issues of life and
death,--combined with a most sorrowful, most deplorable indifference
to the simple and pure teachings of the Christian Faith. Even in the
Christian Faith itself, its chosen ministers seem unable to serve their
Divine Master without quarrelling over trifles,--which is surely no
part of their calling and election.

Everywhere there is a lack of high ideals,--and all the arts suffer
severely in consequence. Modern education itself checks and cramps the
growth of imaginative originality. The general tendency is unhappily
towards the basest forms of materialism, and a large majority of people
appear to be smitten with a paralysing apathy concerning everything
but the making of money. That art is pursued with a horrible avidity,
to the exclusion of every higher and nobler pursuit. Yet it needs
very little “imagination” to prophesy what the end of a nation is
bound to be when the unbridled fever of avarice once sets in. History
has chronicled the ruin of empires from this one cause over and over
again for our warning; and as Carlyle said in his stern and strenuous
way--“One thing I do know: Never on this earth was the relation of
man to man long carried on by cash payment alone. If at any time a
philosophy of Laissez-faire, Competition and Supply-and-Demand start up
as the exponent of human relations, expect that it will soon end.”

Perhaps some will say that Imagination is not a “vanishing gift”--and
that Idealism and Romance still exist, at any rate among the Celtic
races, and in countries such as Scotland, for instance, the home of
so much noble tradition, song and story. I wish I could believe this.
But unhappily the proofs are all against it. If the Imaginative Spirit
were not decaying in Scotland as elsewhere, should we have seen the
wanton and wicked destruction of one of its fairest scenes of natural
beauty--the Glen and Fall of Foyers? There, where once the clear
beautiful cascade whose praises were sung by Robert Burns, dashed down
in its thundering glory among the heather and bracken, there are now
felled trees, sorrowful blackened stumps, withering ferns and trampled
flowers, dirty car-tracks, and all the indescribable muck which follows
in the wake of the merely money-grubbing human microbe. And where once
the pulse was quickened to a sane and healthy delight in the grandeur
of unspoilt Nature, and the mind was uplifted from sordid cares to
high contemplation, we are now asked to buy an aluminium paper-knife
for a shilling! Human absurdity can no further go than this. There can
be little imagination left in the minds that could have tolerated the
building of aluminium works where Foyers once poured music through
the glen. And it is instructive to recall the action taken by the
Belgian people--who are generally supposed to be very prosaic,--when
some of their beautiful scenery on the river Amblève, was threatened
with similar destruction. Mustering together, three to four thousand
strong, they took a reduced model of the intended factory, burnt it
on the spot, and threw its ashes into the river; performing such a
terror-striking “carmagnole” of revolt, that the authorities were
compelled to prohibit the erection of the proposed works, for fear of
a general rising throughout the country. Would that such a protest
had been offered by the people of Scotland against the destruction of
Foyers!

And what of the pitiful ruin of Loch Katrine?--once an unspoilt gem of
Highland scenery, doubly beloved for the sake of Sir Walter Scott’s
“Lady of the Lake”? What of the submerging of “Ellen’s Isle”?--the
ruthless uprooting of that “entangled wood”--


     Where Nature scattered, free and wild.
     Each plant or flower, the mountain’s child,--
     Here eglantine embalmed the air,
     Heather and hazel mingled there.

         *       *       *       *       *

     The wanderer’s eye could barely view
     The summer heaven’s delicious blue--
     So wondrous wild!--the whole might seem
     The scenery of a fairy dream!


I have been assured on the very best authority that all the beauty of
Loch Katrine could have been left undisturbed, had the Scottish people
taken any actively determined measures towards preserving it. The
increasing water-supply necessary for Glasgow could have been procured
from Loch Vennachar, which is a larger loch, and quite as good for the
purpose. Only it would have cost more money, and that extra cash was
not forthcoming, even for Sir Walter’s sake! It is a poor return to
make to the memory of him who did so much for the fame of Scotland,
to mutilate the scene he loved and immortalized! The struggles and
disasters of the Jacobite Cause, and the defeat at Culloden brought
more gain than loss to Scotland, by filling the land with glorious song
and heroic tradition,--the result of the noble idealistic spirit which
made even failure honourable,--but the defacement of Loch Katrine, the
scene of “The Lady of the Lake” is nothing but a disgrace to those who
authorized it, and to those who kept silence while the deed was done.

But there are yet other signs and tokens of the disappearance of
that idealistic and romantic spirit in Scotland, which has more than
anything, helped to make its history such a brilliant chronicle of
heroism and honour. There are “a certain class” of Scottish people who
are ashamed of the Scotch accent, and who affect to be unable to read
anything written in the Scotch dialect. I am told--though I would hope
it is not true--that the larger majority of Scottish ladies object to
Scotch music, and do not know any Scotch songs. If this _is_ true of
any “certain class” of Scottish people, I am sorry for them. They have
fallen down a long way from the height where birth and country placed
them! I should like to talk to any Scot, man or woman, who is ashamed
of the Scotch accent. As well be ashamed of the mountain heather! I
should like to interview any renegade son or daughter of the Celtic
race, who is not proud of every drop of Celtic blood, every word and
line of Celtic tradition,--every sweet song that expresses the Celtic
character. Nothing that is purely national should be set aside or
allowed to perish. It is a thousand pities that the old Gaelic speech
is dying out in the Highlands, along with the picturesque “plaid” and
“bonnet” of the Highland shepherds. The Gaelic language is a rich
and copious one, and should be kept up in every Scottish school and
University. Some of the Gaelic music, too, is the most beautiful in the
world,--and many a so-called “original” composer has taken the theme
for an overture or a symphony from an ancient, long-forgotten Gaelic
tune. A fine spirit of romance and idealism is the natural heritage of
the Celtic race;--far too precious a birthright to be exchanged for
the languid indifferentism of latter-day London fashion, which too
often makes a jest of noble enthusiasm, and which would, no doubt, call
Sir Walter Scott’s fine novel of _The Heart of Midlothian_, “kailyard
literature”--if it dared!

And who that understands anything about music is so foolish and
ignorant as to despise a Scottish song? Where can we match, in all
song literature, the songs of Robert Burns? What German “lied”--what
French or Italian “canzonet” or “chansonette” expresses such real human
tenderness as “Of a’ the airts” or “My Nannie O!”? And it should be
remembered that the imaginative pathos of the Scottish song has its
other side of imaginative humour--sly, dry humour, such as cannot be
rivalled in any language or dialect of the world. And in spite of the
incredible assertion that they are beginning to despise their native
Doric, there are surely few real Scotsmen who, even at this time of day
fail to understand the whimsical satire of the famous old Jacobite song:


     Wha the deil hae we gotten for a king
        But a wee, wee German lairdie,
     An’ he’s brought fouth o’ foreign trash
        An’ dibbled it in his yairdie,--
     He’s pu’d the rose o’ England loons
     An’ broken the harp o’ Irish clowns--
     But our Scotch thistle will jag his thumbs!
        The wee, wee German lairdie!


We shall not find anything of a bilious nature in a Scottish love-song.
We shall not hear the swain asking his lady-love to meet him “in some
sky,” or “when the hay is in the mow,” or any other vaguely indefinite
place or period. The Scottish lover appears,--if we may judge him
by his native song,--to be supremely healthy in his sentiments, and
gratefully conscious of the excellence of both life and love. He takes
even poverty with a light heart, and does not grizzle over it in
trickling tears of dismal melody. No; he says simply and cheerily:


     My riches a’ my penny fee,
       An’ I maun guide it cannie O,--
     But this world’s gear ne’er fashes me,--
         My thoughts are a’ my Nannie O!


It will be a sad day indeed when this spirit of wholesome, tender and
poetic imagination drifts away altogether from Scotland. We must not
forget that the Scottish race has taken a very firm root in the New
World Beyond Seas,--and that out in Canada and Australia and South
Africa the memories and the traditions of home are dear to the hearts
of thousands who call Scotland their mother. Surely they should be
privileged to feel that in their beautiful ancestral land, the old
proud spirit is still kept up,--the old legends, the old language,
the old songs,--all the old associations, which--far away as they
are forced to dwell--they can still hand down to their children and
their children’s children. No king,--no statesman, can do for a
country what its romancists and poets can,--for the sovereignty of the
truly inspired and imaginative soul is supreme, and as far above all
other earthly dominion as the fame of Homer is above the conquests
of Alexander. And when the last touch of idealistic fancy and poetic
sentiment has been crushed out of us, and only the dry husks of
realism are left to feed swine withal, then may we look for the end
of everything that is worth cherishing and fighting for in our much
boasted civilization.

For with the vanishing gift, vanish many other things, which may be
called in the quaint phrasing of an Elizabethan writer, “a bundle of
good graces.” The chivalrous spirit of man towards woman is one of
those “good graces” which is rapidly disappearing. Hospitality is
another “good grace” which is on the wane. The art of conversation
is almost a lost one. People talk as they ride bicycles--at a
rush--without pausing to consider their surroundings. Elegant manners
are also at a discount. The “scorching,” steaming, spasmodic motor
man-animal does not inspire reverence. The smoking, slangy horsey,
betting, woman-animal is not a graceful object. In the days of classic
Greece and Rome, men and women “imagined” themselves to be descended
from the gods;--and however extravagant the idea, it was likely to
breed more dignity and beauty of conduct than if they had “imagined”
themselves descended from apes. A nation rounds itself to an Ideal, as
the clay forms into shape on a potter’s wheel. It is well, therefore,
to see that the Ideal be pure and lofty, and not a mere Golden Image
like that set up by King Nebuchadnezzar, who ended his days by eating
grass,--possibly thistles. Some of our public men might perhaps be
better for a little more Imagination, and a little less red tape. It
might take them healthfully out of themselves. For most of them seem
burdened with an absurd self-consciousness, which is apt to limit the
extent of their view out on public affairs. Others again are afflicted
by the hedge-hog quality of “stand-offishness” which they unfortunately
mistake for dignity. And others affect to despise public opinion, and
have a curious habit of overlooking the fact that it is the much-abused
public which sets them in office and pays to keep them there. Their
Ideal of public life and service partakes too much of Self to be nobly
National.

What, after all, is Imagination? It is a great many things. It is
a sense of beauty and harmony. It is an instinct of poetry and of
prophecy. A Persian poet describes it as an immortal sense of memory
which is always striving to recall the beautiful things the Soul has
lost. Another fancy, also from the East, is that it is “an instinctive
premonition of beautiful things to come.” Another, which is perhaps
the most accurate description of all, is that it is “the Sun-dial of
the Soul on which God flashes the true time of day.” This is true, if
we bear in mind that Imagination is always ahead of Science, pointing
out in advance the great discovery to come. Shakespeare foretold the
whole science of geology in three words--“Sermons in stones,”--and
the vast business of the electric telegraph in one line--“I’ll put a
girdle round the earth in forty minutes.” One of the Hebrew prophets
“imagined” the phonograph when he wrote “Declare unto me the image
of a voice.” As we all know, the marks on the wax cylinder in a
phonograph are “the image of a voice.” The air-ship may prove a very
marvellous invention, but the imagination which saw Aladdin’s palace
flying from one country to another was long before it. All the genii
in the Arabian Nights stories were only the symbols of the elements
which man might control if he but rubbed the lamp of his intelligence
smartly enough. Every fairy tale has a meaning; every legend a lesson.
The submarine boat in perfection has been “imagined” by Jules Verne.
Wireless telegraphy appears to have been known in the very remote days
of Egypt, for in a rare old book called _The History of the Pyramids_,
translated from the Arabic, and published in France in 1672, we find
an account of a certain high priest of Memphis named Saurid,--who, so
says the ancient Arabian chronicler, “prepared for himself a casket
wherein he put magic fire, and shutting himself up with the casket, he
sent messages with the fire day and night, over land and sea, to all
those priests over whom he had command, so that all the people should
be made subject to his will. And he received answers to his messages
without stop or stay, and none could hold or see the running fire, so
that all the land was in fear by reason of the knowledge of Saurid.” In
the same volume we find that a priestess named Borsa evidently used the
telephone. For, according to her history, “She applied her mouth and
ears unto pipes in the wall of her dwelling, and so heard and answered
the requests of the people in the distant city.”

Thus it would seem that there is nothing new under the sun to that
“dainty Ariel” of the mind, Imagination. It sees all present things
at a glance, and foretells what is yet to come. It may well be called
the Sun-dial of the Soul; but it is a Dial that must be kept sound
and clean. There must be no crack in it,--it must not be allowed to
get overgrown with the slimy mosses and rank weeds of selfishness and
personal prejudice,--the index hand must be firmly set,--and none
of the numeral figures must be missing! So, perchance, shall God
flash the true time of day upon it, for such as will hold themselves
free to mark the Hour according to His will. And for those who do
thus hold themselves free,--for those who care to keep this precious
Sun-dial clear and clean in their souls, there shall always be light
and love,--and such clear reflections of divine beauty and peace as
are described by the “Ettrick Shepherd” in his story of _Kilmeny in
Fairyland_:


     For Kilmeny had been, she knew not where,
     And Kilmeny had seen what she could not declare;
     But it seemed as the harp of the sky had rung,
     And the airs of heaven played round her tongue!




THE POWER OF THE PEN


The dignity of Literature is, or used to be, something more than a
mere phrase. Days there were in the long-ago, when the thinkers and
writers of a nation were held to be worthy of higher honour than
trade-kings and stock-jobbers,--when each one that shone out was “a
bright particular star” of genius, as frankly owned as an object
of admiration in the literary firmament. At that time there was
no “syndicated” press. The followers and disciples of Literature
were not all herded together, as it were, in a kind of scribbling
trades-union. The poet, the novelist, the essayist,--each one of
these moved in his or her own appointed orbit, and their differing
special ways of handling the topics of their time served to interest,
charm and stimulate the intelligences of people who were cultured and
appreciative enough to understand and honour their efforts. But now
things are greatly changed. What has been generally understood as
“cultured” society is rapidly deteriorating into baseness and voluntary
ignorance. The profession of letters is so little understood, and
so far from being seriously appreciated, that responsible editors
will accept and publish magazine articles by women of “title” and
“fashion,” who prove themselves as ignorant of grammar as they are of
spelling. The printer’s reader corrects the spelling, but the grammar
is generally left as its “aristocratic” writer penned it, in majestic
incompleteness. The newspapers are full, not of thoughtful, honestly
expressed public opinion on the affairs of the nation, but of vapid
“personalities,” interesting to none save gossips and busy-bodies. A
lamentable lack of strength is apparent in the whole “tone” of modern
Literature, together with a still more lamentable lack of wit. All
topics, say the pessimists, are exhausted. The quarrels of politicians
have exhausted earth,--the recriminations of the Churches have
exhausted Heaven,--and the bold immoralities of society have, almost,
if not quite, exhausted Hell. Yet the topic which holds in itself a
great many of the pleasures of earth and heaven--with perhaps a touch
of the other nameless place also, is still the Power of the Pen. It
remains, even in these days, the greatest power for good or evil in
the world. With the little instrument which rests so lightly in the
hand, whole nations can be moved. It is nothing to look at; generally
speaking it is a mere bit of wood with a nib at the end of it--but when
it is poised between thumb and finger, it becomes a living thing--it
moves with the pulsations of the loving heart and thinking brain, and
writes down, almost unconsciously, the thoughts that live--the words
that burn.

To the power of the Pen we owe our laws, our government, our
civilization, our very religion. For without it we should have no
Bible--no New Testament. Our histories, our classics, our philosophies,
our poetry, would all be lost with their originators. We should not
know that Julius Cæsar ever walked on the shores of Britain, or that
Nero fiddled while Rome was burning. In fact we should still be in
the dark ages, without so much as a dream of the magnificent era of
progress through which we have come, and in which we, of this present
generation, have our glorious share. And so I think and venture to
say that the power of the Pen is one which commands more millions of
human beings than any monarch’s rule, and that the profession of the
pen, called Literature, is the greatest, the highest, and the noblest
that is open to aspiring ambition. Empires, thrones, commerce, war,
politics, society--these things last but their brief hour--the Power of
the Pen takes note of them as they pass--but outlives them all!

We should know nothing to-day of the grandeurs of old Egypt, or the
histories of her forgotten kings, if it were not for the Rosetta
stone--on which the engraver’s instrument, serving as a pen, wrote the
Egyptian hieroglyphics beside the Greek characters, thus giving us
the clue to the buried secrets of a long past great civilization. The
classic land of Greece, once foremost in all things which make nations
great, particularly in the valour and victorious deeds of her military
heroes, has almost forgotten her ancient glory--she might perhaps be
forgotten by other nations altogether in the constant springing up of
new countries and peoples if it were not for Homer! The blind, despised
old man, who sang her golden days of pride and conquest, still keeps
her memory green. And let us not forget that other glorious poet, who
laid his laurel-wreath and life upon her shrine--our own immortal
Byron--whose splendid lyric, “The Isles of Greece” may stand beside
the finest lines of Homer, and not be shamed.

What does all Italy, and particularly Florence, make chief boast of
to-day? Not commerce, not wealth--simply Dante! In his lifetime he was
made a subject for hatred and derision--he was scorned, cast out, and
exiled by his fellow-townsfolk--yet now he is the great glory of his
native city which claims respect from all the world for having been the
birthplace of so supreme a soul. So, even after death, the Power of the
Pen takes its revenge, and ensures its just recognition.

Yet there are many workers in Literature who say that the Power of
the Pen gives them no joy at all,--that it is a “grind,”--that it is
full of disappointment and bitterness, and that they never get paid
enough for what they do. This last is always a very sore point with
them. They brood on it, and consider it so often, that by and by the
question of how much or how little payment they get, becomes the only
way in which they regard their profession. It is the wrong way. It is
the way that leads straight to biliousness and chronic dyspepsia. It is
not my way. To me, what little power of the pen I possess, is a magic
talisman which I would not exchange for millions of money. It makes
life beautiful for me--it intensifies and transfigures all events and
incidents--it shows me a whole history in the face of a child--a whole
volume of poetry and philosophy in the cup of a flower. It enables
me to see the loveliness of nature with keener and more appreciative
gratitude--and it fills me with an inward happiness which no outward
circumstance can destroy.

Of course just payment is to be demanded and expected for every kind
of work. The rule of “give and take” holds good in all classes of
employment. Each author’s power of the pen commands its price according
to the value set upon it by the public. But I, personally, have refused
many considerable sums of money offered to me if I would consent to
“work up” or “bring forward” certain schemes and subjects with which
I have no sympathy. The largest cheque would never tempt me to write
against my own inclination. If I were given such a choice as this--to
write something entirely opposed to my own feeling and conscience for
a thousand pounds, or to write my honest thought for nothing, I would
write my honest thought, and let the thousand pounds go. I am glad to
say that some of my contemporaries are with me in this particular form
of literary faith--but not as many as, for the honour of our calling, I
could desire.

Then again, there is that vexed question of--the Public! I have often
noticed, with a humility too deep for words, that all the great modern
writers, or, I should say, all those who consider themselves the
greatest, have a lofty contempt for the public. “‘He,’ or ‘she’ writes
for the Public,” is a remark which, when spoken with a withering sneer,
is supposed to have the effect of completely crushing the ambitious
scribbler whose Power of the Pen has attracted some little attention.
Now if authors are not to write for the Public, who are they to write
for? Certain of the “superior” folk among them will say that they write
“for posterity.” But then, Posterity is also the Public! I really
do not see how either the great or the small author is to get away
from the Public anyhow! There is only one means of escape, and that
is--not to write at all. But if those to whom the Power of the Pen is
given, wish to claim and use their highest privileges, they will work
always for the public, and try to win their laurels from the public
alone. Not by the voice of any “clique,” “club,” or “set” will Time
accept the final verdict of an author’s greatness, but by the love and
honour of an entire people. Because, whatever passing surface fancies
may for awhile affect the public humour, the central soul of a nation
always strives for Right, for Justice, and for final Good, and the
author whose Power of the Pen helps strongly, boldly, and faithfully on
towards these great ends, is not, and shall not be, easily forgotten.

I hope and I believe, that it is only a few shallow, ignorant and
unsuccessful persons--fancying perhaps that they have the Power of the
Pen when they have it not--who, in their disappointment, take a sort
of doleful comfort in “posing” as unrecognized geniuses, whose quality
of thought is too fine,--they would say too “subtle”--for the public
taste. For, in my humble opinion, nothing is too good for the Public.
They deserve the very best they can get. No “scamp” work should ever
be offered to them. If a poet sings, let him sing his sweetest for
them; if a painter paints pictures, let him give them his finest skill;
if an author writes stories, essays or romances, let him do his very
utmost to charm, to instruct, to awaken their thought and excite their
interest. It is not a wise thing to start writing for “posterity.”
Because, if the present Public will have nothing to do with you, it is
ten to one whether the future will. All our great authors have worked
for the public of their own immediate time, without any egotistical
calculations as to their possible wider appreciation after death.

The greatest poet in the world, William Shakespeare, was, from all we
can gather, an unaffected, cheery, straightforward Warwickshire man,
who wrote plays to please the Public who went to the Globe Theatre.
He did not say he was too good for the Public; he worked _for_ the
Public. He attached so little importance to his own genius, that he
made no mention of his work in his will. So we may fairly judge that he
never dreamed of the future splendour of his fame--when, three hundred
years after his death, every civilized country in the world would have
societies founded in his name; when, year after year, new discussions
would be opened up concerning his Plays, new actors would be busy
working hard to represent his characters, and, strangest compliment of
all, when envious persons would turn up to say his work was not his
own! For when genius is so varying and brilliant that a certain section
of the narrow-minded cannot understand its many-sided points of view,
and will not believe that it is the inheritance of one human brain,
then it is great indeed! Three hundred years hence there will, no
doubt, be other people to announce to the world that Walter Scott did
not write, and could not have written, the Waverley Novels. For they
are--in their own special way--as great as the plays of Shakespeare.
He, too, was one of those who wrote for the Public. With his magic
wand he touched the wild mountains, lakes and glens of his native
land, and transfigured them with the light of romance and beauty for
ever. Can we imagine Scotland without Walter Scott and Robert Burns?
No! Their power of the pen rules the whole country, and gives it over
the heads of monarchs a free fairy kingdom to all classes and peoples
who have the wish and will to possess it. There are certain superior
people nowadays who declare that Walter Scott is “old-fashioned,” and
that they, for their parts, cannot read his novels. Well, I grant that
Walter Scott _is_ old-fashioned--as old-fashioned as the sunshine--and
just as wholesome. He lived in a time when men still reverenced women,
and when women gave men cause for reverence. I think if he could be
among us now, and see the change that has come over society since his
day, he would scarcely have the heart to write at all. The idolatry
of wealth--the servile worship of the newest millionaire--would
hardly inspire his pen, save perhaps to sorrow and indignation. But
if he were with us and did write for us, I am sure he would employ
some of his great power to protest against the lack of fine feeling,
gentleness, forbearance and courtesy which unfortunately marks much of
our latter-day society. I think he would have something to say about
the school-girl who smokes,--I fancy his mind might revolt against the
skirt-dancing peeress! I think he would implore women not to part with
their chief charm--womanliness--and I am sure he would be very sorry to
see children of ten and eleven so deplorably “advanced” as to be unable
to appreciate a fairy tale.

And what of dear Charles Dickens--he, whom certain superfine persons
who read Yellow Journalism presume to call “vulgar”? Is love, is pity,
is tenderness, is faith “vulgar”? Is kindness to the poor, patience
with the suffering, tolerance for all men and all creeds “vulgar”?
If so, then Charles Dickens _was_ vulgar!--not a doubt of it! Few
authors have ever been so blessedly, gloriously “vulgar” as he! What
marvellous pictures his “power of the pen” conjures up at once before
our eyes!--pathetic, playful, humourous, thrilling--rising to grandeur
in such scenes as the shipwreck in _David Copperfield_; or that
wonderful piece of description in the _Tale of Two Cities_, when the
tramping feet of the Spirit of the French Revolution sweep past in the
silence of the night! Match us such a passage in any literature past or
present! It is unique in its own way--as unique as all great work must
be. There is nothing quite like it, and never will be anything quite
like it. And when we “go” with such great authors as these--and by this
I mean, when we are determined to be one with them--we shall win such
victories over our hearts and minds, our passions and desires, as shall
make us better and stronger men and women.

And this brings me to a point which I have often earnestly considered.
One cannot help noticing that the present system of education is fast
doing away with two great ingredients for the thorough enjoyment of
life, and especially the enjoyment of Literature--Imagination and
Appreciation. On the school-boy or school-girl who is “coached” or
“crammed,” the gates of fairyland and romance are shut with a bang. I
had once the pleasure of entertaining at my house a small gentleman
of eleven, fresh from his London College--he was indifferent to, or
weary of life; things generally, were a “bore,” and he expressed his
opinion of fairy tales in one brief word, “Rot!” Now altogether apart
from that most revolting expression, which is becoming of frequent use,
especially in the “upper circles,” it seemed to me a real misfortune
to consider, that for this child, Hans Andersen was a sealed book, and
the wonders and beauties of the _Arabian Nights_ a lost world. And in
the same way I pity the older children--the grown men and women, who
cannot give themselves up to the charm or terror of a book completely
and ungrudgingly--who approach their authors with a carping hesitation
and a doubtful preparatory sneer. By so doing they shut against
themselves the gate of a whole garden of delights. Imagination is the
supreme endowment of the poet and romancist. It is a kind of second
sight, which conveys the owner of it to places he has never seen,
and surrounds him with strange circumstances of which he is merely
the spiritual eyewitness. One of the most foolish notions prevalent
nowadays is that an author must personally go and visit the place he
intends to describe. Nothing is more fatal. For accuracy of detail,
we can consult a guide book--but for a complete picture which shall
impress us all our lives long, we must go to the inspired author whose
prescience or second-sight enables him to be something more than a mere
Baedeker. Endless examples of this second-sight faculty could be given.
Take Shakespeare as the best of them. He could never have personally
known Antony and Cleopatra. He did not live in the time of Julius
Cæsar. He was not guilty of murder because he described a murder in
_Macbeth_. He could not have been a “fellow-student” of Hamlet’s. And
where do you suppose, among the grim realities of life, he could have
met those exquisite creations, Ariel and Puck, if not in the heaven
of his own peerless imagination, borne to him on the brilliant wings
of his own thought, to take shape and form, and stay with us in our
English language for ever! Walter Scott had never seen Switzerland when
he wrote _Anne of Geierstein_. Thomas Moore never visited the East,
yet he wrote _Lalla Rookh_. Charles Dickens never fought a duel, and
never saw one fought, yet the duel between Mr. Chester and Haredale in
_Barnaby Rudge_ is one of the finest scenes ever written. Because an
author is able to describe a certain circumstance, it does not follow
that he or she has experienced that very circumstance personally. Very
often it may be quite the contrary. The most romantic descriptions
in novels have often been written by people leading very hum-drum,
quiet lives of their own. We have only to think of _Jane Eyre_, and to
remember the prosy, dull days passed by its author, Charlotte Brontë.

To refer once more to Hans Andersen--we all know that he never
could have seen a Dresden China shepherdess eloping up the chimney
with a Dresden China sweep. We know he never saw that dainty little
shepherdess weeping on the top of a chimney because the world was so
large, and because all her gilding was coming off. But when we are
reading that fantastic little story, we feel he _must_ have seen it
somehow, and we are conscious of a slight vexation that we never see
such a curious and delightful elopement ourselves. This is a phase of
the power of the pen--to make the beautiful, the quaint, the terrible,
or the wonderful things of imagination seem an absolute reality.

But to get all the enjoyment out of an author’s imagination, we, who
read his books, must ourselves “imagine” with him. We must let him take
us where he will; we must not draw back and refuse to go with him.
We must not approach him in a carping spirit, or make up our minds
before opening his book, that we shall not like it. We should not
allow our particular views of life, or our pet prejudices to intervene
between ourselves and the writer whose power of the pen may teach us
something new. And above all things, we should prepare ourselves to
appreciate--not to depreciate. Nothing is easier than to find fault.
The cheapest sort of mind can do that. The dirty little street-boy can
enter the British Museum and find fault with the Pallas Athene. But
the Pallas Athene remains the same. To be Pallas Athene is sufficient.
The power of appreciation is a great test of character. To appreciate
warmly, even enthusiastically, is generally the proof of a kind and
sunny disposition; to depreciate is to be in yourself but a sad soul at
best! For depreciation in one thing leads to depreciation in another;
and by and by the daily depreciator finds himself depreciating his
Maker, and wondering why he was ever born! And he will never find
an answer to that question till he changes his humour and begins to
appreciate; then, and only then, will life explain its brightest
meaning.

Of course, when vulgarity, coarseness, slang, and ribaldry are set
forward as “attractions” in certain books and newspapers, it is
necessary to depreciate what is not the power of the pen, but the abuse
of the pen. Such abuse is easily recognizable. The libellous paragraph,
the personal sneer, the society scandal--there is no need to enumerate
them. But we do not call the writers of these things authors, or even
journalists. They are merely on a par with the anonymous letter-writer
whom all classes of society agree in regarding as the most contemptible
creature alive. And they do not come at all under the heading of the
power of the pen, their only strength being weakness.

I have already said that I believe the Power of the Pen to be the
greatest power for good or evil in the world. And I may add that this
power is never more apparent than in the Press. The Press nowadays is
not a literary press; classic diction and brilliancy of style do not
distinguish it by any means. It would be difficult to find a single
newspaper or magazine to which we could turn for a lesson in pure and
elegant English, such as that of Addison, Steele or Macaulay. But in
the Scott or Byron days, the Press was literary to a very great extent,
and as a natural consequence it had a powerful influence on the success
or failure of an author’s work. That influence is past. Its work to-day
deals, not with books, but with nations.

National education, progressing steadily for years, has taught the
Public to make up its own mind more quickly than ever it did before, as
regards the books it reads. It will take what it wants and leave the
rest; and the Press can neither persuade it nor repel it against its
own inclination. So that the author in these days has more difficulties
and responsibilities than in the past. He has to fight his battle
alone. He has many more rivals to compete with, and many more readers
to please. And the Press cannot help him. The Press may recommend, may
even “boom” his work; but several instances have occurred lately where
such recommendation has not been accepted. For, sometimes the Public
fight shy of a “boom.” They think it has been worked up by the author’s
friends, and they are not always mistaken. And they silently express
the fact that they are quite capable of choosing the books they wish
to read, without advice or assistance. This being the case, the Press
is beginning to leave books and authors alone to shift for themselves
as best they may, and is turning to other pastime. Nations, peoples,
governments! These are the great footballs it occasionally kicks in
the struggle for journalistic pre-eminence. And I hope I shall not be
misunderstood if I venture to say that it is a somewhat dangerous game!
Because, however powerful the Press may be, it is not the People. It is
the printed opinion of certain editors and their staff. The People are
outside it altogether. And if some one on the Press insults a monarch
or a nation, that insult should not be taken as a People’s insult. It
is the insult of the editor or proprietor who deliberately allows it to
be printed in the particular journal he controls.

It is a thousand pities, for example, that a section of the lower
_boulevard_ press in Paris should be accepted in any quarter, as being
representative of the feeling of the whole French people. When flippant
and irresponsible newspaper scribes resort to calumny for the sake
of notoriety, they prove themselves unworthy to be trusted with the
Power of the Pen. In any case it can only be a God-forsaken creature
who seeks to earn his living by scurrility. Such an one may excite
individual contempt, but does not merit the notice of a great nation.

As an author and as a lover of literature, I care very much for the
honour and dignity of the British Press, and I cannot but earnestly
deprecate the too free exchange of petty or malicious innuendo between
foreign and English writers on their various respective journals.
Bismarck used to say, “The windows which our Press breaks we shall have
to pay for.” The power of the pen is abused when _such_ windows are
broken as can only be mended by the sufferings of nations. If France
or Germany sneers at us, or misreads our intentions, I do not see that
we are called upon to sneer at them in return. That is mere schoolboy
conduct. Our dignity should shame their flippancy. The Press of such an
empire as Great Britain can afford to be magnanimous and dignified. It
is too big and strong a boy to throw stones at its little brothers.

On such a subject as the Power of the Pen, one might speak endless
discourses, and write endless volumes, for it is practically
inexhaustible. It is a power for good and evil--as I have said--but the
author wrongs his vocation if he does not always, most steadfastly and
honestly, use it for Good. The Power of the Pen should define Right
from Wrong with absolute certainty,--it should not so mix the two
together that the reader cannot tell one from the other. In what is
called the “problem” novel or the “problem” play, the authors manage so
to befuddle the brains of their readers, that they hardly know whether
virtue is vice or vice virtue. This is putting the power of the pen to
unfair and harmful uses. And when a writer--any writer--employs his
or her power to promote the spirit of Atheism and Materialism, the
pen is turned into a merely murderous tool of the utmost iniquity.
And whosoever uses it in this sense will have to answer at a Higher
Tribunal for much mischief and cruelty wrought in the world.

Many people are familiar with Shakespeare’s town, Stratford-on-Avon,
quaint and peaceful and beautiful in itself, and in all its
surroundings. Outside it, many roads lead to many lovely glimpses of
landscape; but there is one road in particular which winds uphill,
and from which, at certain times, the town itself is lost sight of,
and only the tapering spire of Holy Trinity Church--Shakespeare’s
Church--can be seen. Frequently at sunset, when the rosy hue of the
low clouds mingles with the silvery mist of the river Avon, all the
houses, bridges and streets are veiled in an opaque glow of colour--and
look like “mirage,” or a picture in a dream. And then, the spire
of Shakespeare’s Church, seen by itself, rising clear up from the
surrounding haze, puts on the distinct appearance of a Pen,--pointing
upwards, as though prepared to write upon the sky!

Often and often have I seen it so, and others have seen it with me,
glittering against clouds, or lit up by a flashing sunbeam. I have
always thought it a true symbol of what the Power of the Pen should
be--to point upwards. To point to the highest aims of life, the best,
the greatest things; to rise clear out of the darkness and point
straight to the sunshine! For, if so uplifted, the Power of the Pen
becomes truly invincible. It can do almost anything. It can shame the
knave--it can abash the fool. It can lower the proud,--it can raise the
humble. It can assist the march of Science,--it can crush opposition.
Armed with truth and justice, its authority is greater than that of
governments,--for it can upset governments. It would seem impossible to
dethrone an unworthy king; but it has been done--by the Power of the
Pen! It is difficult to put down the arrogance of a county snob,--but
it _can_ be done!--by the Power of the Pen! It may seem a terrible
task to root up lies, to destroy hypocrisies, shams, false things of
every kind, and make havoc among rogues, sensualists, and scoundrels
of both high and low degree,--but it can be done, by the Power of the
Pen! And to those who are given this power in its truest sense, is also
added the gift of prophecy--the quick prescience of things To Be--the
spiritual hearing which catches the first sound of the approaching
time. And beyond the things of time this spiritual sense projects
itself, and hears, and almost _sees_, all that shall be found most
glorious after death!

With the Power of the Pen we can uphold all noble things; we can
denounce all vile things. May all who have that power so deal with
it--and point us on--and upward! For as our great poet, Tennyson,
says:--


         What is true at last will tell;
         Few at first will place thee well;
     Some too low would have thee shine,
     Some too high--no fault of thine!
         Hold thine own and work thy will!




THE GLORY OF WORK


Very commonplace and familiar--perhaps too commonplace and familiar
is the subject of Work. Every one worthy the name of man or woman is,
or desires to be a Worker, and none surely would voluntarily swell
the distressed ranks of the Unemployed. For to be unemployed is to be
miserable. To find nothing to do,--to be of no use to ourselves or to
our fellow-creatures is to be more or less set aside and cast out from
the ever-working Divine scheme of labour and fruition, ambition and
accomplishment. Among all the blessings which the Creator showers so
liberally upon us, there is none greater than WORK. And amid all the
evils which Man wilfully accumulates on his own head through ignorance
and obstinacy, there is none so blighting and disastrous as Idleness.

There are, however, certain people who have persuaded themselves to
look upon Work as a curse. Many of these pin their theories on the
Third Chapter of the Book of Genesis. There they read:

“Cursëd is the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all
the days of thy life.

“In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread till thou return unto
the ground.”

But we may take comfort in the fact that the Book of Genesis shows some
curious discrepancies. For in the Second Chapter God is represented as
making _one_ single man out of the dust of the ground, yet in the very
First Chapter of the same Book we read that,--

“God created man in His own image; male and female created he _them_.

“And God blessed _them_ and said unto _them_ ... Be fruitful and
multiply, and replenish the earth and _subdue_ it: and have _dominion_
over the fish of the sea and over the fowl of the air, and over every
living thing that moveth upon the earth.”

Thus we find that the story of Adam and Eve and the Serpent does
not occur till _after_ the creation of mankind (in the plural) and
_after_ the Divine order that this same mankind (in the plural) should
“replenish the earth and subdue it.” No “curse” accompanied this
command. On the contrary, it was sanctified by a blessing. “God blessed
them.” And whether Genesis be taken seriously, or only read as poetic
legend founded on some substratum of actual events, the fact remains
that “to replenish the earth and subdue it,” literally means,--to WORK.
The “dominion” of man over the planet he inhabits is not to be gained
by sitting down with folded hands and waiting for food to drop into the
mouth. It is evident that he was intended to earn his right to live. It
is also evident that the blessing of God will be his, if from the first
beginnings of conscious intelligence and aptitude he resolutely and
honestly sets his shoulder to the wheel.

It is only when we are at work that we are vitally and essentially a
part of God’s great creative scheme. Idleness is an abnormal condition.
It is not to be found in nature. There everything works, and in the
special task allotted to it, each conscious atom finds its life and
joy. The smallest seed _works_, as it slowly but surely pushes its
way up through the soil;--the bird _works_, as it builds its nest and
forages the earth and air to find food for its young. We cannot point
to the minutest portion of God’s magnificent creation and say that it
is idle. Nothing is absolutely at rest. There is--strictly speaking--no
rest in the whole Universe. All things are working; all things are
moving. Man clamours for rest,--but rest is what he will never
get,--not even in the grave. For though he may seem dead, new forms
of life germinate from his body, and go on working in their appointed
way,--while, with the immortal part of himself which is his Soul, he
enters at once into fresh fields of labour. Rest is no more possible
than death, in the Divine scheme of everlasting progress where all is
Life.

Nature is our mother, from whose gentle or severe lessons we must learn
the problems of our own lives. And whenever we go to her for help or
for instruction, we always find her working. She never sleeps. She
never has a spare moment. “Without haste, without rest” is her eternal
motto. When we, like fretful children, complain of long hours of toil,
scant wages and short holidays, she silently points us to the Universe
around us of which we are a part, and bids us set our minds “in tune
with the Infinite.” The Sun never takes holiday. With steady regularity
it performs its task. For countless ages it has worked without any
attempt to swerve from its monotonous round of duty. It shines on the
just and on the unjust alike; it gives life and joy equally to the gnat
dancing in its beams, as to the human being who hails its glory and
warmth as the simple expression of “a fine day.” It gets no wages. It
receives very little in the way of thanks. Its duty is so evident and
is always so well done, that by the very perfection of its performance
it has exhausted the far too easily exhausted sense of human gratitude.
Like a visible lamp of God’s love for us it generates beauty and
brightness about us wherever we go,--and it invites us to look beyond
the veil of creation to the Creator, who alone sustains the majestic
fabric of life.

In some ways God Himself may be resembled to the Sun, seeing that He
receives very little of our gratitude. We are so wonderfully guided
by His wisdom that we sometimes think ourselves wiser than He. Of our
own accord we give Him scarcely any of our real working powers, and
were it not that we are all, in the mass, unconsciously swayed by His
command, the little we do give would be less. Our ideas of serving Him
too often consist in attending various sectarian places of worship
where quarrelling is far more common than brotherly love and unity.
In these places of worship we pray to Him for Ourselves and our own
concerns. We ask Him for all we can possibly think of, and we seldom
pause to consider that He has already given us more than we deserve.
It very rarely enters into our heads to realize that we are required
to show Him some return--that we are bound to work--no matter in how
small a degree--towards something in His vast design which has, or
shall have, its place in the world’s progress. We continue to implore
Him to work for Us,--just as if He needed our urging! We petition Him
to give us food and other material comforts,--yet if we study the laws
of Nature we shall learn that we are intended to Work for our food and
for all the things we want. We must Work for them in common with the
rest of all our fellows in the animal, bird, and insect kingdoms. What
a man does, that he has. We have no need to ask God for what He has
already given us. He has provided all that is necessary for our health
and sustenance on the earth,--but we must earn it,--deserve it,--and
take a little intelligent trouble to understand the value of it, as
well as to learn the laws by which we may gain and hold our own in
life. We must, in fact, Work. All Creation visibly shows us that God
Himself has worked and is still working. He, who has made us in “His
own Image” must have from each one of us a strong and faithful effort
to follow His Divine pre-ordained order of Labour and Progress. It may
be asked--To what does the Labour and Progress tend? The answer of our
last great Poet Laureate, Tennyson, is the best--the


        One far off divine event
     To which the whole creation moves.


Whether it be work with the hands, or work with the brain, it is work
of some kind that we must do if we would prove ourselves worthy to be
a part of the ever-working Universe. And if by disinclination,--or
by lethargy of mind and spirit, we decline to share in the splendid
“onward and upward” march of toil, the time comes when great Mother
Nature will accept us exactly at our own valuation. If we choose to
be no more than clods of clay, then as clods of clay she will use
us, to make soil for braver feet than our own. If, on the contrary,
we strive to be active intelligences, she will equally use us for
nobler purposes. The formation of our condition rests absolutely with
ourselves. No one person can shape the life of another. The father
cannot ensure the fortunes of his son. The mother cannot guarantee the
happiness of her daughter. Both mother and father may do their best on
these lines, but sooner or later the son and daughter will take their
own way and make their own lives. Each individual man or woman must
work out his or her own salvation. For this is the Law,--and it is a
Law divine and eternal against which there is no appeal.

Let us realize, therefore, the Divine Necessity of Work,--and having
realized it let us take an honest joy in being able to do any sort of
work ourselves, no matter how humble or monotonous such work may be.
There is nothing really common even in what is called “common” work.
There is nothing undignified in the roughest labour. It is only the
“loafer” who loses both self-respect and dignity. The peasant who
turns the soil with his spade all day long is a noble and primeval
figure in the landscape, and deserves our consideration and respect.
The countless thousands of men, working in huge factories, patiently
guiding the machinery of giant looms, sweltering their very lives out
in the fiery heat of huge furnaces where iron and steel are shaped
for the uses of the world--these are the actual body of mankind--the
nerves, the muscles, the sinews of humanity. They represent the
nobility, the worth, the movement of the age. They are the Working
People. And the Working People of this, or of any other nation are the
People indeed--the People whose word--if they will only utter it--must
inevitably become Law.

Sometimes, however, when we work,--when we perform some special round
of duty more or less monotonous, we are unlike the rest of the working
Universe. The Universe works without any grumbling at its work--but
we--well!--we rather like to grumble. We want every one to know how
hard our work is, and how badly paid we are. Many of us, who are
men, would like to pass entire days, loafing about, our hands in our
pockets, our pipes in our mouths, serving no purpose whatever in the
world save that of replenishing the till of the nearest public-house.
Others of us who are women, would love to dress up for all we are worth
and meander through the streets, staring into shop-windows and coveting
goods we have no money to buy. We forget that while we are wasting time
in this fashion, we are consuming some of the very energy that should
be at work to obtain for us whatever we desire. And we are also apt to
forget that very often those who possess what we envy,--who hold all
that we would win--have worked for it.

It is of course quite true that some workers are well rewarded while
others get little if any reward at all. But to understand the cause
of this inequality we must examine the character of the work implied,
and the spirit in which that work is done. Is it undertaken with
cheerfulness and zeal? Or is it merely accepted as a “grind,” to be
shirked whenever possible and only half accomplished? I venture to
think that the man who loves his work,--who is content to begin at the
lowest rung of the ladder in order to master all the minutest details
of his particular trade or profession--whose Work is dearer to him
than either his wages or his dinner--is bound to be rewarded, bound to
succeed in whatever calling of life he may be. It is the half-hearted
worker who fails. It is the “scamp” worker who sticks in the rut. Every
man should do his utmost best. When he does only his half or quarter
best, he wrongs his own capability and intelligence even more than he
wrongs his employer. To “scamp” even the simplest kind of work proves
him to be out of tune with Nature. For in the natural world we find no
“scamping.” Each tiny leaf, each humble insect is as perfect in its way
as the planet itself. A midge’s wing seen through the microscope is
as brilliant and beautiful as that of a butterfly. And so,--“looking
up through Nature unto Nature’s God” we hear everywhere the Divine
command--“Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy Might.”

I hardly think the love of Work, for Work’s own sake, is a leading
characteristic of the workers of the present day. There is a tendency
to “rush” everything,--to get it done and over. It is a rare thing to
meet a man who is so fond of his work that he can hardly be persuaded
to leave it. Yet in him is the real germ of success, and with him are
the true possibilities of power. For the conscientious and painstaking
worker more often than not may become the great discoverer. In the
very earnestness with which he bends over his daily toil which may
often seem the merest monotonous drudgery, it frequently chances that a
little hint,--an unexpected clue,--is given out from the great factory
of nature, which may revolutionize a whole handicraft, or quicken a
failing industry. Nothing of value in science or art is ever vouchsafed
to the mere “hustler.” And there is by far too much “hustling,”
nowadays. I am an ardent lover of steady toil and continuous progress,
provided the progress is accompanied by the growth of beauty, goodness
and happiness, but I am no advocate of “rush” or “speed.” Nothing is
well done that is done in a hurry. Every scrap of time should be used
as a precious gift,--not snatched up and devoured. For with haste
comes carelessness and what is called “slop work.” “As long as it’s
done never mind how it’s done,” is a kind of humour that is common
enough and easily fostered. Haste by no means implies real swiftness
or attention to details. We need not draw comparisons between the
foreign workman and his British brother, because there is a maxim which
says “Comparisons are odious.” But in justice to the foreign workman,
it must be said that he often shows great intelligence and artistic
ability. Moreover that he sometimes works twelve hours a day against
the British eight, at half the British workman’s wages.

But my own love for everything British is so deep and hearty that I
should like to see British handicraft, British art, British work of all
kinds at the head of creation. And I do most distinctly think it the
duty of every British employer of labour to provide work for British
workers first. Let the men who live in the land find means to live.
It is surely the right of the British working man to have the first
chance with a British employer. But this does not always happen. It is
a “consummation devoutly to be wished,” but it is not to be at once
realized even by schemes of fiscal policy. It is only to be attained
by the British working people themselves,--by the quality of the work
they do and the spirit in which they do it. We talk a great deal about
Education, technical and otherwise. What are the results? The fact
seems to be that when there was no compulsory Education much better
work was done. Houses were better built,--furniture was more strongly
made. Compare the brick-and-a-half “modern villa” architecture, with
its lath and plaster doors and window-frames, with the warm thick
walls and stout oak timbers of a farm or manor-house of the sixteenth
century! Put side by side the flimsy modern chair, and the serviceable
oak one, hand made in the time of our forefathers! Connoisseurs and
collectors of bric-à-brac are supposed to have a craze for “old”
things, merely because they _are_ “old.” This is not altogether true.
Old things are appreciated because they are good,--because they show
evidences of painstaking and careful Work. An old oak staircase in
a house is valued as a treasure, not only for its age, but for its
artistic construction, which our best workers can only imitate and
never surpass. It must, I think, be conceded that our forefathers
had better conceptions of the fitting and the beautiful in some ways
of work than we have. We have only to compare the Cathedrals which
they built for the worship of God, with our uninspired ugly modern
Churches and chapels. We know that they appreciated the beauties of the
landscape, and that they loved the grand old English trees, which our
short-sighted County Councils are destroying every year. Nothing can be
more pitiful to see than the ruthless and stupid cutting down of noble
trees all over the country, under the rule that their branches shall
not hang over the road. Thus, every grateful place of shade is ruined,
as well as much natural beauty. Our ancestors, more individually free,
showed finer taste. The roofs of their houses were picturesquely
thatched or tiled, and gabled,--their eyes were never affronted by
the dull appearance of cheap slate and corrugated iron. They left us
a heritage of many lovely and lasting things; but it is greatly to be
feared that we shall not do likewise to those that come after us. We
are destroying far more than we are creating.

And when we come to the higher phases of intellectual work, we find
that though we have plenty of “schools of art” we have no great
British artists such as Gainsborough, Reynolds or Romney. And though
every one is supposed to know how to read and write, we have no great
literature such as that of Shakespeare, Scott, Thackeray or Dickens.
These belonged to the days of non-compulsory Education. Poetry, too,
the divinest of the arts, is well-nigh dead. The great poets were born
in so-called “uneducated” times. Our present system of Education is
absolutely disastrous in one respect--that of its tendency to depress
and cramp rather than to encourage the aspiring student. Its mechanical
routine works on the line of flattening all human creatures down to one
level. Originality is often “quashed.” Yet in all educational schemes
there should be plenty of room left for the natural ability of the
student or worker to expand and declare itself in some entirely new
form wherever possible.

But despite our perpetual talk of the advantages of Education, here
we are to-day with plenty of schools both before and behind us, but
no very great men. And looking a long way back in history we see that
when there was no Compulsory Education at all, there _were_ very great
men,--men who made the glory of England. Shall we leave anything after
us, to match their heritage? It is open to doubt. Much of our modern
work is “scamped” and badly done. And a great deal of the mischief
arises from our way of “rushing” things. We are so anxious to catch
Time by the forelock that we almost tear that forelock off. But why
such haste? What is our object? Well,--we want to make money before
we die. We want to make it, and then spend it on ourselves, or else
leave it to our children, who will no doubt get rid of it all for us
with the most cheerful rapidity. Or we want to have enough to “sit
down and do nothing.” This is some people’s idea of perfect bliss.
A servant of mine once very kindly reproached me for sticking at my
desk so long. “If I were a lady,” said she--“I would sit down and do
nothing.” No more cruel torture can be imagined than this. We read in
history of prisoners who, condemned to such a life, went mad with the
misery of it. The only way to live happily and healthfully is to try
with every moment of our time to accomplish something--even if it be
only a thought. Thought, as we know, crystallizes into action. Yet
very few people really think. Many get no further than to think they
are thinking. To think is a kind of Work--too hard for many folks. In
politics, for instance, some people let the Press think for them. They
cannot be bothered to do it for themselves. And when the Press makes
what is called a “corner” in any particular policy, they sometimes
submit to be “cornered.” There have been of late a great many rumours
concerning a gigantic Press “combine” which is to be formed for the
purpose of swaying the opinion of the British public and particularly
the opinion of the British working man. In other words, opinion is no
longer to be “free,” but coerced by something like a Press “Trust”
Company. Now if we are to believe this, we must likewise believe the
British public fools. And we should surely be sorry to be forced to
such a conclusion. Let us hope the British public has an opinion
of its own entirely apart from the Press, and that it will declare
that opinion bravely and openly. It is hard to imagine that it will
allow its fondness for “prize-competitions” and “puzzle-pictures”
to interfere with its common sense and honesty. I may say, however,
that I have often marvelled at the generosity with which a large
majority of people will insist on filling the pockets of newspaper
capitalists, by purchasing such quantities of the particular journals
which contain these puzzles and competitions. The guileless innocence
of childhood in the nursery is not more touching than the faith of the
great British public in what is called a “Picture” or “Word” puzzle.
Over this kind of thing I have seen otherwise sane though indolent
people actually _work_! Once I made a calculation of the hours spent by
a friend of mine in deciphering one of these newspaper problems, and
found that he could certainly have obtained a very fair knowledge of
French or Italian in the time, or he could have learned shorthand and
typewriting. He was successful in the competition, and received for his
pains the splendid sum of three-halfpence. It was explained to him that
there were so many successful competitors that the hundred--or thousand
pounds reward had to be divided among the crowd. Three half-pence
therefore was his legitimate share.

I am no politician. I am simply a Worker--and I do such work as I
can, quite independently of sect or party. But _as_ a Worker, and
looker-on at the events taking place around me, I cannot help feeling
that this dear land of ours is on the verge of a great crisis in her
history. We hear much of failing trade,--depression in this or that
quarter,--yet apart from political agitators, it seems to me that Great
Britain stands where she has always stood--at the top of the world!
Whatever influences have set her there, surely there she is. And it
is for all true workers to keep her there. It is not by what parties
or Governments will do for us that her position will be sustained
and strengthened,--it is by what we, in the skill and excellence of
our Work in all trades and professions, will do for Her. It is by our
determination to excel in all kinds of Work that she will hold her
own,--by our unstinted time, our ungrudging labour, our zeal, our
cheerfulness, our love for her glory that she--and ourselves--will
exist. It is necessary to “protect” her, and all things that may help
to make her stronger and greater--but sometimes the word “Protection”
may be made to apply chiefly to capitalists and “cornerers” of trade.
Herein comes the hard work of Thinking. We must Think for ourselves.
God has given us brains to work with. There is never any good reason
why we should hastily adopt the political views of certain newspaper
proprietors, who are perhaps under the impression that we have no
brains at all, and that being thus sadly deficient, we are willing
to buy their brains for a penny or a halfpenny! It is by the workers
of the land that the land lives. And more than this,--it is from the
workers that must come the great battle of Right against Might. It is
for the Workers to put to shame by their own faith and honour, the
wicked Atheism and open immorality which are disgracing some of our
so-called “upper” classes to-day--and it is for the Workers to show by
their upright, temperate lives, and their steady downright Work, that
they are determined to keep the foundations of the Home secure, and the
heart of England warm and true. What says brave Thomas Carlyle?

“All true Work is sacred; in all true Work, were it but true
hand-labour, there is something of divineness. Labour, wide as the
Earth, has its summit in Heaven. Sweat of the brow, and up from that
to sweat of the brain, sweat of the heart--which includes all Kepler
calculations, Newton meditations, all Sciences, all spoken Epics, all
acted Heroisms, and Martyrdoms, up to that ‘Agony of bloody sweat’
which all men have called divine! O brother, if this is not ‘worship,’
then I say the more pity for worship, for this is the noblest thing yet
discovered under God’s sky. Who art thou that complainest of thy life
of toil? Complain not. Look up, my wearied brother!--see thy fellow
Workmen there in God’s eternity, surviving there, they alone surviving;
sacred Band of the Immortals, celestial Bodyguard of the Empire of
Mankind. Even in the weak Human memory they survive so long, as saints,
as heroes, as gods, they alone surviving--peopling, they alone, the
measured solitudes of Time. To thee, Heaven, though severe, is _not_
unkind; Heaven is kind as a noble Mother--as that Spartan mother,
saying while she gave her son his shield--“With it, my son, or upon
it!” Thou too shalt return home in honour, brother Worker!--to thy far
distant Home, in honour, doubt it not, if in the battle thou keep thy
shield!”




THE HAPPY LIFE


Most people want to be happy if they can. I suppose it may be safely
set down without fear of contradiction that no one who is sane and
healthy wilfully elects to be miserable. Yet the secret of happiness
seems to be solved by very few. People try to be happy in all sorts of
queer ways--in speculation, land-grabbing, dram-drinking, horse-racing,
bridge-playing, newspaper-running, and various other methods which
are more or less suited to their constitutional abilities--but in
many cases these channels, carefully dug out for the reception of
a perpetual inflowing of the stream of happiness, appear very soon
to run dry. I have been asked scores of times what I consider to be
the happiest life in the world, and I have always answered without
the least hesitation--the Life Literary. In all respects it answers
perfectly to the description of the “Happy Life” portrayed by that
gentle sixteenth-century poet, Sir Henry Wotton:--


     How happy is he born and taught
       That serveth not another’s will,
     Whose armour is his honest thought,
       And simple truth his utmost skill.


Herein we have the vital essence of all delight--honest thought
and simple truth--and in the “serveth not another’s will,” glorious
liberty. For chiefest among the joys of the Life Literary are its
splendid independence, its right of free opinion, and its ability to
express that opinion. An author is bound to no person, no place, and no
party, unless he or she wilfully elects to be so bound. To him, or to
her, all the realms of Nature and imagination are entrance-free--the
pen unlocks every closed door--and not only is the present period of
time set out like a stage-scene for contemplation and criticism, but
all the past ages, with their histories, and the rise and fall of their
civilizations, arrange themselves to command in a series of pictures
for the pleasure of the literary eye and brain; and it is just as easy
to converse in one’s own library with Plato on the immortality of the
soul as it is good-humouredly to tolerate Mr. Mallock and his little
drawing-room philosophies. For a book is more or less the expression
of the mind, or a part of the mind, of its writer, and, inasmuch
as it is only with the moral and intellectual personalities of our
friends and enemies that we care to deal, it matters little whether
such personalities be three or four thousand years old, or only of
yesterday. And to live the Life Literary means that we can always
choose our own company. We can reject commoners and receive kings, or
_vice versâ_. The author who is careful to hold and to maintain all the
real privileges and rights of authorship is a ruler of millions, and
under subjection to none. The position is unique and, to my thinking,
unequalled.

There are many, of course, who will by no means agree with me as to
the superior charm of the Life Literary over all other lives--and such
objectors will be found mostly in the literary profession itself.
Unsuccessful authors--particularly those who are in any way troubled
with dyspepsia--will be among them. “Tied” authors also--and by “tied”
authors I mean the unhappy wretches who have signed contracts with
publishers several years ahead, and are, so to speak, dancing in
fetters. Authors who count the number of words they write per day,
like potatoes, and anxiously calculate how much a publisher will
possibly give for them per bushel, are not likely to experience any
very particular “happiness” while they are measuring out halfpence in
this fashion. And authors who run after “society” and want to be seen
here, there, and everywhere, are bound to lose the gifts of the gods
one by one as they scamper helter-skelter through the world’s Vanity
Fair, while they may be perfectly sure that the “great” or swagger
persons with whom they seek to associate will be the first to despise
and neglect them in any time of need or trouble, as well as the last to
support or help them in any urgent cause which might be benefited by
their assistance.

On this point we have only to remember the melancholy experience of
Robert Burns, who, after having been flattered and feasted by certain
individuals who were, in an ephemeral sense, influential for the time
being, either through their rank or their wealth, was afterwards
shamefully neglected by them, and finally, notwithstanding the various
social attentions and courtesy he had at one time received, he was
left, when ill and dying, in such extremity as to be compelled to
implore his publisher for the loan of five pounds! What had become of
all his wealthy and “influential” friends? Why they were exactly where
all “influential” persons would be now in a similar case--“otherwise
engaged” when their help is needed. Nothing can well be more deplorable
than the position of any author who depends for success on a clique
of “distinguished” or “society” persons. He or she has exchanged
independence for slavery--the nectar of the gods for a base mess of
pottage--and the true “happiness” of the Life Literary for a mere
miserable restlessness and constant craving after fresh excitement,
which gradually breeds nervous troubles, and disturbs that fine and
even balance of brain without which no clear or convincing thought is
possible. Again, authors who deliberately prostitute their talents to
the writing of lewd matter unfit to be handled by cleanly-minded men
and women need never hope to possess that happy and studious peace
which comes from the


     Pure intent to do the best
     Purely--and leave to God the rest.


For the highest satisfaction in the Life Literary is to think that
perhaps, in a fortunate or inspired moment, one may have written at
least a sentence, a line, a verse, that may carry comfort and a sense
of beauty to the sorrowful, or hope to the forlorn; while surely the
greatest pang would be to know that one had cast the already despairing
soul into a lower depth of degradation, or caused the sinner to revel
more consciously in his sin.

But are there no drawbacks, no disappointments, no sufferings in the
Life Literary? Why, of course there are! Who would be such a useless
block of stone, such a senseless lump of unvalued clay, as not to
ardently wish for drawbacks, disappointments, and sufferings? Who
that has a soul at all does not pray that it may be laid like glowing
iron on the anvil of endurance, there to be beaten and hammered by
destiny till it is of a strong and shapely mould, fit for combat,
nerved to victory? And I maintain that such drawbacks, disappointments,
difficulties, and sufferings as the profession of Literature entails
are sweeter and nobler than the cares besetting other professions,
inasmuch as they are always accompanied by never-failing consolations.
If the pinch be poverty, the true servant of Literature can do with
less of this world’s goods than most people. Luxury is not called for
when one is rich in idealism and fancy. Heavy feeding will not make a
clear, quick brain. Extravagant apparel is a necessity for no one--and
genius was never yet born of a millionaire.

If the “thorn in the flesh” is the petty abuse of one’s envious
contemporaries, that is surely a matter for rejoicing rather than
grief, as it is merely the continuance of an apparently “natural law in
the spiritual world” acting from the Inferior upon the Superior, which
may be worded thus: “Whosoever will be great, let him be flayed alive!”
Virgil was declared by Pliny to be destitute of invention; Aristotle
was styled “ignorant, vain, and ambitious” by both Cicero and Plutarch;
Plato was so jealous of Democritus that he proposed to burn up all his
works; Sophocles was brought to trial by his own children as a lunatic;
Horace was accused of stealing from all the minor Greek poets; and so
on in the same way down to our own times.

Pope went so far as to make a collection of all the libels passed upon
him, and had them preserved and bound with singular care, though I
believe no one now knows where to find these scandalous splutterings
of Grub Street. Swift is reported to have said to the irate author of
the “Dunciad”: “Give me a shilling and I will ensure you that posterity
shall never know one single enemy against you excepting those whose
memory you _yourself_ have preserved.” Herein is a profound truth. The
malicious enemies of a great author only become known to the public
through the mistaken condescension of the great author’s notice.

Milton’s life was embittered by the contemptible spite of one
Salmasius. Who was Salmasius? we ask nowadays. We do not task who was
Milton. Salmasius was the author of the “Defensio Regi” or Defence
of Kings, a poor piece of work long ago forgotten, and he was the
procurer of foul libel against the author of “Paradise Lost,” one
of England’s greatest and noblest men. What small claim he has to
the world’s memory arises merely from his viciousness, for not only
did he make use of the lowest tools to aid him in conspiring against
Milton’s reputation, but he spread the grossest lies broadcast, even
accusing the poet of having a hideous personal appearance--“a puny
piece of man; a homunculus; a dwarf deprived of the human figure; a
contemptible pedagogue.” When the despicable slanderer learned the
fact that Milton, so far from answering to this description, was of a
pleasing and attractive appearance, he immediately changed his tactics
and began to attack his moral character--which, as even Milton’s
bitterest political enemies knew, was austerely above the very shadow
of suspicion. It was said that the poet’s over-zealousness in answering
the calumnies of Salmasius cost him his eye-sight, which, if true, was
surely regrettable. Salmasius died dishonoured and disgraced, as such a
cowardly brute deserved to die; Milton still holds his glorious place
in England’s literary history. So it was, so it is, so it ever will be.

Greatness is always envied--it is only mediocrity that can boast of a
host of friends. “When you have resolved to be great,” says Emerson,
“abide by yourself, and do not weakly try to reconcile yourself with
the world.” It is impossible to quote one single instance of a truly
great man existing without calumniators. And the Life Literary without
any enemies would be a shabby go-cart; or, as our American cousins put
it, a “one-horse concern.” Some lines that were taught to me when I was
a child seem apposite to this subject, and I quote them here for the
benefit of any struggling units of the Life Literary who may haply be
in need:--


     You have no enemies, you say?
       Alas! my friend, the boast is poor--
     He who has mingled in the fray
       Of duty, that the brave endure,
     _Must_ have made foes! If you have none,
     Small is the work that you have done;
     You’ve hit no traitor on the hip,
     You’ve dashed no cup from perjured lip,
     You’ve never turned the wrong to right--
     You’ve been a coward in the fight![5]


But it is perhaps time that I should drop the masculine personal
pronoun for the feminine, and, being a woman, treat of the Life
Literary from the woman’s point of view. In olden days the profession
of literature was looked upon as a terrible thing for a woman to
engage in, and the observations of some very kindly and chivalrous
writers on this subject are not without pathos. To quote one example
only, can anything be more quaintly droll at this time of day than the
following:--

“Of all the sorrows in which the female character may participate there
are few more affecting than those of an Authoress--often insulated
and unprotected in society--with all the sensibility of the sex,
encountering miseries which break the spirits of men!”

This delicate expression of sympathy for a woman’s literary struggles
was written by the elder Disraeli as late as 1840. Truly we have
raced along the rails of progress since then at express speed--and
the “affecting” sorrows of an “Authoress” (with a capital A) now
affect nobody except in so far as they make “copy” for the callow
journalist to hang a string of cheap sneers upon. The Authoress must
take part with the Author in the general rough-and-tumble of life--and
she cannot too quickly learn the truth that when once she enters
the literary arena, where men are already fisticuffing and elbowing
each other remorselessly, she will be met chiefly with “kicks and
no ha’pence.” She must fight like the rest, unless she prefers to
lie down and be walked over. If she elects to try for a first place,
it will take her all her time to win it, and, when won, to hold it;
and, in the event of her securing success, she must not expect any
chivalrous consideration from the opposite sex, or any special kindness
and sympathy from her own. For the men will consider her “out of her
sphere” if she writes books instead of producing babies, and the
women will, in nine cases out of ten, begrudge her the freedom and
independence she enjoys, particularly if such freedom and independence
be allied to fortune and fame. This all goes without saying. It has to
be understood and accepted uncomplainingly. The “old-fashioned” grace
of chivalry to women, once so proudly lauded by poets and essayists
as the distinguishing trait of all manly men, is not to be relied on
in the Life Literary--for there it is as dead as door-nails. Men can
be found in the literary profession who will do anything to “down” a
woman in the same calling, and, if they cannot for shame’s sake do it
openly, they will do it behind her back. “’Tis pitiful, ’tis wondrous
pitiful”--for the men! But if the woman concerned has studied her art
to any purpose she will accept calumny as a compliment, slander as
a votive wreath, and “envy, hatred, and all uncharitableness” (from
which, with pious hypocrisy, the most envious and uncharitable persons
pray “Good Lord deliver us” every Sunday) as so many tokens and
proofs of her admitted power. And none of these things need disturb
the equanimity of the Life Literary. “Can any man cast me out of the
Universe? He cannot; but whithersoever I may go there will be the
sun and the moon, and the stars and visions, and communion with the
gods!”[6]

Speaking as a woman, I can quite understand and appreciate all the
little difficulties, irritations, and trials incident to a woman’s
career in literature; and though I myself welcome such difficulties
as so many incentives to fresh effort, I know that there are many of
my sex who, growing weary and discouraged, are not able to adopt this
attitude. And looking back into the past, one is bound to see a host of
brilliant women done to death by cruel injustice and misrepresentation,
a state of things which is quite likely to be continued as long as
humanity endures.

But no useful object is served by brooding over this apparently
incurable evil. “The noble army of martyrs” who praise the Lord in the
“Te Deum” are likely to be of the sex feminine. But what does that
matter? It is more glorious to be martyred than to die of over-eating
and general plethora. Moreover mental or intellectual martyrdom is a
necessary ingredient for the “happy” life--a touch of it is like the
toothache, helping one to be duly thankful when the pain ceases. For,
if we never understood trouble, we should never taste the full measure
of joy.

One thing can be very well dispensed with by both men and women who
look for happiness in the Life Literary, and that is the uneasy
hankering after what is called “Fame.” Fame has a habit of setting its
halo on the elected brows without any outside advice or assistance.
Those authors who are destined for it will assuredly win it, though
all the world should intervene; those for whom it is not intended must
content themselves with the temporary notoriety of pretty newspaper
puffs and “stock” compliments, such as “the renowned” or “well-known”
or “admired” author or authoress, and be glad and grateful for these
meaningless terms, inasmuch as the higher Fame itself at its utmost is
only a brief and very often inaccurate “line in history.”

The rewards and emoluments of the happy life, such as I have always
found the Life Literary to be, are manifold and frequently incongruous.
They may be considered in two sections--the outward or apparent and the
interior or invisible. Concerning these I can only, of course, speak
from my own experience. The outward or apparent occur (so far as I
myself am concerned) as follows:--

1. Certain payments, small or large, made by publishers who undertake
to present one’s brain work to the world in print, and who do the best
they can for their authors, as well as for themselves.

2. Public appreciation and condemnation, about equally divided.

3. Critical praise and censure, six of one and half-a-dozen of the
other.

4. Endless requests for autographs.

5. Innumerable begging letters.

6. Imperative, sometimes threatening, demands for “interviews.”

7. Hundreds of love-letters.

8. Continual offers of marriage.

9. Shoals of MSS. sent by literary aspirants to be “placed” or
“recommended.”

10. Free circulation of lies, caricatures, and slanders concerning
oneself, one’s personality, friends, ways of work, and general
surroundings.

11. The grudging and bitter animosity of rival contemporaries.

12. Persistent public and private mis-representation of one’s
character, aims, and intentions.

But all these things taken together weigh very little when compared
with the other side of the medal--the interior and invisible delight
and charm of the Life Literary--the unpurchasable and never-failing
happiness which no external advantage can give, no inimical influence
take away. It is well-nigh impossible to enumerate the pleasures that
attend the lover and servant of Literature; they are multitudinous,
and, like all things spiritual, outweigh all things temporal. Here are
just a few among the kindly and constant favours of the gods:--

1. The power and affluence of creative thought.

2. A perpetual sense of intimate participation in the wonders of Nature
and Art.

3. A keen perception of the beautiful.

4. Intense delight in the genius of all great men and women.

5. A cheerful and contented spirit.

6. Constant variety of occupation.

7. Joy in simple things.

8. The love of friends that are tried and true.

9. The never-wearying interest of working to try and give pleasure to
one’s reading public.

10. The gifts and glories of Imagination.

11. Tranquillity of mind.

12. Firm faith in noble ideals.

And, to quote from Walt Whitman what the inward sense of the
“happiness” of the Life Literary really is, the disciple of Literature
may say:--

“I will show that there is no imperfection in the present and can be
none in the future. And I will show that, whatever happens to anybody,
it may be turned to beautiful results.”

Were all the lives in the world offered to me for my choice, from the
estate of queens to that of commoners, I would choose the Life Literary
in preference to any other, as ensuring the greatest happiness. It
is full of the most lasting pleasure, it offers the most varied
entertainment, all the arts and sciences group themselves naturally
around it as with it and of it--for the literary student is, or should
be, as devout a lover of music as of poetry, as ardent an admirer
of painting and sculpture as of history and philosophy--that is, if
complete enjoyment of the literary gift is to be possessed completely.

I take it, of course, for granted, in this matter of the “happy” life,
that the individual concerned, whether male or female, is neither
dyspeptic nor bilious, nor afflicted with the incurable _ennui_ of
utter selfishness, nor addicted to dram or drug drinking. Because under
unnatural conditions the mind itself becomes unnatural, and the Life
Literary is no more productive of happiness than any other life that is
self-poisoned at its source. But, given a sane mind in a sound body, a
clear brain, a quick perception, a keen imagination, a warm heart, and
a never-to-be-parted-with ideal of humanity at its best, noblest and
purest, then the Life Literary, with all the advantages it bestows, the
continuous education it fosters, the refinement of taste it engenders,
the love and sympathy of unknown thousands of one’s fellow-creatures
which it brings, is the sweetest, most satisfying, most healthful
and happy life in the world. Moreover it is a life of power and
responsibility--a life that forms character and tests courage. We
soon learn to know the force of a Thinker in our midst, whether man
or woman. We soon realize who it is that sends the lightning of
truth across our murky sky, when we see a sudden swarm of cowards
scurrying away from the storm and trying to shelter themselves under a
haystack of lies; and we invariably respect whosoever has the valour
of his or her opinions, and the strength to enunciate them boldly and
convincingly with a supreme indifference to conventional conveniences.
For “To know the truth,” says an Arabian sage, “is a great thing for
thyself; but to tell the truth to others is a greater thing for the
world!”

FOOTNOTES:

[5] The late Charles Mackay, LL.D.

[6] Epictetus.




THE SOUL OF THE NATION


At the present time, and during the present time’s singularly loose
notions of manners, morals, and dignity of behaviour, it was perhaps
to be expected that some one or other of the daily newspapers would,
in sagacious appreciation of free “copy,” start a public discussion on
the religious faith of this Christian Empire. It was perhaps as equally
probable that considering the remarkable laxity of certain bishops
and ordained ministers of the gospel generally, a “press” question
should be put to the House of Tom, Dick and Harry--“Do We Believe?”
Granting the premises, it was hardly to be wondered at that Tom, Dick
and Harry should straightway arise in their strength and reply to the
question,--and not only Tom, Dick and Harry of the laity, but Tom,
Dick and Harry of the clergy likewise. Great was the discussion,--fast
and furious waged the war of words, and the Penny Daily which provoked
the combat was thus conveniently supplied with material for which
the proprietors,--most of them Sons of Israel,--had nothing to pay.
And now, the arguments being heard and ended, nobody is a whit the
wiser, though some few may be several whits the sadder. For to speak
honestly, nothing more reprehensible has ever smirched the career of
an English journal than the fact that it should have lent itself to the
advertized questioning of the nation’s religious faith. It was an open
flaunting of infidelity in the face of the civilized world. To talk
of the “conversion” of India, China or Japan, while a leading British
newspaper openly invites the notoriety-hunting section of the British
public to air their opinions of the Christian Faith in its columns,
just as if the Faith itself were on public trial in a Christian
country, is only one example of the many forms of utter Humbug in which
we are nowadays so unfortunately prone to indulge. Our sometimes-called
“heathen” ally, Japan, has lately taught us many lessons which perhaps
we knew once and have forgotten, and which perhaps we need to learn
again,--such as valour without conceit, strength without roughness,
and endurance without complaint,--but one of the greatest lessons of
all she has given us is that of her people’s pious reverence for the
Unseen and Eternal, and their belief in the ever-present “Spirits
of the Dead” whom they honour and will not shame. What a deplorable
contrast we make in our pandering to the lowest tastes of the mob when,
without a word of protest, we permit _our_ “Spirits of the Dead,”--the
spirits of our gallant forefathers who fought for the pure Faith of
England and sealed it with their blood,--to be degraded and insulted by
a cheap newspaper discussion on the most private and sacred emotions
of the soul, as though such a discussion were of a character suited to
take its place among police-cases and quack medical advertisements!
True, we are constantly being made aware that the British Press is no
longer the clean, sane, strong and reliable institution it once was,
when “personalities” were deemed vulgar, and lies dishonourable,--and
therefore we perhaps ought not to feel very greatly surprised when
the name and possible attributes of the Almighty Creator Himself are
dragged through the purlieus of “up-to-date” journalism,--but surely
there is something very deplorable and disgraceful in the fact that
any one professing to be a follower of the Christian Faith should have
replied to what can only be termed, considering the quarter from whence
it came, an ironical demand, “Do We Believe?” The best and wisest
answer would have been complete silence on the part of the public. No
more effectual “snubbing” to the non-Christian faction could have been
given. But unfortunately there are a certain class of persons whose
prime passion is to see themselves in print, and to this end they will
commit any folly and write any letter to the newspapers, even if it
be only to state that primroses were seen somewhat early in bloom in
their back yards. And such, chiefly, were the kind of men and women who
poured themselves into the channels of the “Do We Believe?” discussion,
like water running down the streets into gutters and mains,--never
seeming to realize that to the thinking and intellectual world, their
foolish letters, addressed to such a public quarter, merely proved
their utter loss of respect for themselves, not only as professing
Christians and subjects of a Christian Empire, but as men and women. No
real follower of a Faith--any Faith--would be so lost to every sense of
decency as to discuss it in a daily newspaper. As for the clergy who
took part in the boresome palaver, one can only marvel at them and
ask why they did not “veto” the whole thing at once? A penny paper is
not the Hall of Pontius Pilate. As ministers of Christ they might have
protested against a modern-vulgar “mock” trial of their Master. It was
in their power to do so, and such a protest would have redounded to
their honour. At any rate, they might themselves have abstained from
joining in the foolish and unnecessary gabble. For gabble it was, and
gabble it is. No useful cause has been served thereby and no advantage
gained. The Sons of Israel have asked a question,--and some of the
unwise among professing Christians, being caught in the Israelitish
trap, have answered it. The manner in which both question was put and
answer given, was unworthy of a country where the Christian Faith is
the guiding light of the realm. Matters of religion are of course
open to discussion in the treatise or book intended for quiet library
reading, or even in the better-class magazines, but to hawk sacred
subjects of personal sentiment and national creed about in the daily
wear of newspaper columns which equally include murders, divorces,
bigamies, stocks and shares, and the general _débris_ cast off as
flotsam and jetsam in the turgid waves of Mankind’s ever-recurring
mischief against itself, was to the last degree reprehensible and
regrettable. And this, if only for the possible impression likely to
be created by such an action among the peoples of those countries to
whom, with ridiculous inconsistency, we presume to send missionaries
for the purpose of “converting” them to a Creed we ourselves drag
through the mire of doubt in our daily press. Fortunately, however, the
matter, deplorably as it has exhibited our “religion” to the eyes of
“heathen” nations, has now come to an end. It has worked no change,--it
has strengthened no weak places,--it has helped no struggling effort
towards good. The Soul of the Nation has not been moved thereby, and
it is the Soul of the Nation--that great, silent patient and labouring
Soul with which all religion has to do,--that Soul, which the Christian
Creed, ever since it was first preached in Britain, has raised to such
a height of supremacy and power, that it needs all its reserve of sober
courage and devout humility to help it bear its honours greatly. For
has it not been said--“Let him that thinketh he standeth, take heed
lest he fall!”

One may look upon the innate spirit of Revivalism, exemplified in the
hysteric wave of preaching, praying and psalm-singing that has recently
spread over Wales and other districts, as so much instinctive and
natural popular rebellion against the insidious flood of atheism which
has for the past ten years been striving to poison all the channels
of man’s better health and saner condition,--rebellion too against
the apathetic coldness and shameless indifference of the ordained
clergy to the clamorous needs of those neglected “flocks” which
they are elected to serve. “Enough,” say the People, “of shams and
shows!--enough of ministers who only minister to themselves and their
own convenience!--enough of the preaching of the Gospel by men who do
not and will not fulfil a single one of its commands in their own lives
and actions! Let us have something forcible and earnest,--let us be
permitted to _feel_, even though we shout and sing ourselves hoarse
with the emotion which has been seething in us for years,--an emotion
which we cannot explain to ourselves, but which craves, with a passion
beyond all speech, for some touch of Heaven, some closer comprehension
of that ‘After-Death,’ which God keeps back from us like a prize or a
punishment for His obedient or rebellious children! Anything is better
than the cold dead inertia of the Churches, sunk as they are in a blind
lethargy from which they only bestir themselves dully when a chance
is offered to them of engaging in some petty personal quarrel. We are
weary of priestly humbug, selfishness and inefficiency--we will gather
ourselves together and re-assert our faith in the world to come, as
true disciples of the Lord!” And whether such Revivalists elect to
march under the banner of Cocoa Cadbury, (an excellent advertisement
for Cadbury,) or any other emblazoned device of a successful trading
concern, is not a matter of much moment. Starving folk will march
anywhere,--under anything or anybody,--if they are promised nourishment
at the end of the journey. And the Soul of the Nation is, at this
present period of time, starving to the point of inanition in all forms
of spiritual food. The Good Shepherd gave His life for the sheep, but
the underlings who care not for the flock have let the wolves into the
fold.

A thing which would appear to be frequently forgotten by those who hold
Governmental authority, is that the most vital, most powerful and most
active principle of a Nation is this spark of the Divine which for
want of any clearer mode of description we call the Soul. The Soul of
a single individual man or woman is the mere copy in miniature of the
Soul of a race, or the Soul of a world. An involuntary, half-conscious,
but nevertheless resistless impetus towards ultimate Good is the Soul’s
original quality and inborn Ideal. For, if the human weakness of the
fleshly creature impel it towards temporary phases of evil, sooner
or later the Soul will set to work to pull it out of the stifling
quagmire. Material Nature is, as we all know, a remedial agent, and
wherever mischief is wrought she seeks to amend it. Spiritual Nature
is a still stronger healer. For every injury self-inflicted or wrought
by others on the immortal Soul she has a saving balm,--and for every
inch of progress which the Soul essays to make along the lines leading
to good, she helps it forward a mile. Individuals find this out very
soon in their own personal experience,--Nations discover it more
slowly, first, because they have a longer time to live and learn than
the individual unit,--and secondly because, moving in great masses,
their periods of transit from one epoch of civilization to another
must necessarily be more laborious and difficult. But in all epochs,
in all eras, the Soul wins. The fiery leaven which is of God, works
through the lump in various strange and complex forms till the whole is
leavened. And those nations in which the Soul, or Spirit of the Ideal,
is crushed and kept down by the iron hand of Materialism, are very soon
seen to fall back in the rear of progress,--so far back indeed that
we are fain to speak of them as “decaying nations,” though of a truth
no decay is possible to them, but only temporary retrogression, which
will in due course revert to progress again when the Soul is once more
allowed to have its way. But Governments whose common law of procedure
is to put this Soul or “spirit of the Ideal,” in the background as a
kind of myth or chimera, and who seek to settle everything pertaining
to the interests of the people by what they term “practical” methods,
(which often prove wholly _un_practical,) are naturally prone to forget
that whatever they do, whatever they say, the busy Soul of the Nation
is altogether outside and above them, fighting for itself, often
desperately and piteously, and struggling to make use of its wings and
rise higher and ever higher despite its hobbles of iron and feet of
clay. Religion is supposed to give it this, its demanded freedom of
noble flight, and the Christian religion, above all religions in the
world, with its consoling teaching that out of sorrow cometh joy, and
out of Death is born Life, should make for the happiness and peace of
every living creature. But when the very ministers of that glorious
Faith cast doubt upon it, and live their own lives in direct opposition
to it,--when undevout and therefore limited scientists dissect a midge
of truth in order to launch a leviathan of fallacious theory,--when
there is no ONE pure and simple Church of Christ where all may meet in
honest worship of His perfect Creed, but only a million Sects which
blaspheme His Divine memory by their outrageous and petty quarrels one
with the other,--it is no matter for surprise that a strong revulsion
of feeling should set in, or that the Soul of the Nation, conceiving
itself grievously wronged and neglected, should try to find some
fresh path of its own heavenward,--some way out of mere Sham--in the
belief that if it obeys its own instinctive desire towards the Highest
Ideal, God will not suffer it to go far astray. For the quarrels of
the Churches are the second crucifixion of Christ. The apathy of
the priesthood is the deliberate casting away to sin of the people.
Where there is no unity, there is no force; and the divine founder of
Christianity Himself has told us that a house divided against itself
shall not stand.

Yet when one comes to think of it, it is the strangest thing in the
world that Christians should quarrel, seeing how plain and clear
are the instructions left to them for their guidance by the Master
whom they profess to serve. The New Testament is easy reading. Its
commands are brief and concise enough. There would seem to be no
room for discussion or difference. Why should there be followers of
Luther, Wesley, or any other limited human preacher or teacher, when
all that is necessary is that we should be followers of Christ? The
Soul of the Nation asks no more than this Gospel of Love, lovingly
imparted,--it seeks but for the one firm faith in the eternal things
which are its birthright,--a faith held purely, and wholly undoubted
by those whose high mission is to teach it to each generation in
turn,--it craves no more than that touch of heavenly sympathy which
makes the whole world kin--that holy link which binds all mankind
together in one strong knot of indissoluble spiritual belief in the
love and justice; the Unseen Force behind Creation, which will surely,
out of the verities of that same love and justice, grant us a future
life wherein will be made clear to us the reason and necessity of
our strange sufferings, martyrdoms, disappointments and losses in
this present mere brief episode of living. The Soul of the Nation
does not in itself ask reward for its good deeds,--nor does it weakly
complain if punishment be inflicted upon it for its evil ones,--but
it does demand justice,--it does ask why, for no conscious fault of
its own, it should be born, only to die. Were this question never to
be answered, then the mathematical exactitude with which everything,
small or great, is balanced in the universe would be a merely elaborate
scheme of unnecessary fallacy, irrationally designed for the delusion
of creatures who are not worth the trouble of deluding. No one who
is sane and morally healthy can contemplate such an idea as this for
a moment,--it follows therefore that Man, living as he does between
two Infinities, and endowed with a brain which can spiritually
consider both without reeling, must be guided by some great and
illimitably wise destiny towards ends he knows not, but which he
may be reverently permitted to believe are for his better progress,
greater happiness and higher understanding, and that he needs, out
of all things in the world, a Faith, by which his soul shall be kept
strong and pure, his mind steady, and his sympathies active. No mockery
of Christianity, such as that of Servian priests who have publicly
blessed regicides,--no cruel tyranny, such as that of the Greek Church
which dares to appeal to a God of Love while the mighty masses of the
Russian people remain steeped in misery, and are, by very wretchedness,
driven to crime,--no cold Conventionality of Form and Custom, such as
is practised in fashionable London “West End” churches where society
humbugs gather together to listen smirkingly to the civil cant of other
society humbugs in surplices, who, passing for ministers of Christ,
almost fear to preach the Gospel as it was written, lest its plain
blunt truths should offend some highly-placed personage,--none of this
kind of “religion” at all is of use,--but faith,--real faith--real
aspiration--real uplifting to the Ideal of all things noble, all
things great, wise, helpful and true. This, at the present crucial
moment of time, is what the Soul of the Nation demands,--and not only
the Soul of our own beloved and glorious Nation, but the Souls of
all nations whatsoever on the globe. They stand up,--each in place,
each on its own spiritual plane,--stern, strong and beautiful;--like
the fabled statue of Memnon they face the sunrise, and at the first
touch of the first ray of glory they speak. Their voices are as
thunder among the spheres,--they demand what they deserve,--justice,
hope, comfort, uplifting! To the mystic High Altar of the Infinite
and Eternal they lift their praying hands, and to the priests of all
religions they appeal. “Give us the Way, the Truth and the Life! Cease
your own wranglings and petty disputations,--have done with mere
human dogma concerning the matters of life and death,--let us see the
MAN, Christ,--He who suffered our sorrows, and knew our need,--the
Brother, the Friend, the Helper, for whom, in braver days than these,
men gladly gave their lives to sword and fire and the jaws of wild
beasts,--is there no manhood left now of such undaunted mettle?--is
there not one who will think of US, the Nations, who hunger for the
glorious vitality of Faith, which, like the blood in our veins, keeps
us warm and young and vigorous? Or must we perish in the devil-clutch
of Materialism, and go down to the depths, thrust there by the very men
who have been elected to hold us close to God? We demand our rights
in the Divine and Eternal Love!--and these rights, born in us from
the beginning, we will have, even if all present-existing human forms
and fabrics of creed go down in our struggle for the one pure faith
under whose holy influence we shall become stronger and wiser, and
better able to understand our work and place in creation! The gates of
Life shall not be shut upon us;--we will not accept the materialist’s
latter-day testimony that death shall be the end of all. For if there
be an Eternal Good we are part of its being and share in its Eternal
attributes. And we say,--we Souls of the Nations,--to all our preachers
and teachers and representatives of the Divine on earth--Lift us up! Do
not cast us down! Be yourselves the models of what you would have US
become!--so shall we be willing and ready to learn from you,--so shall
we honour, love and patiently follow you. But if you, as ministers of
religion, show yourselves worse hypocrites than the very sinners whom
the law condemns, then beware of us and our just vengeance! For you
take from us our very life-blood, when you cheat us of the hope of
Heaven!”

This is true. A Nation robbed of its faith, is like a human body robbed
of its heart--it has neither pulse nor motion,--it is the mere corpse
of itself lying prone in the dust of perishable waste things. And the
fact that grave retribution will follow the steps of those who assist
in bringing it to this doom cannot be doubted. Such retribution has
then been visited heavily on over-prosperous peoples, who, misled by
special pleaders in the cause of Materialism have set God aside out
of their countings as a non-proven quantity. The “non-proven” has
always proved itself with crushing swiftness and authority in the
fall of great powers, the shaking of great thrones, and the ruin and
degradation of great names,--while very often a calamitous climax of
misery and disaster has befallen an entire civilization and brought it
to utter decay. Such occurrences are traceable through all history,
and always appear to result from the same cause,--the crushing out of
the vital principle, the spiritual starving of the Soul of a Nation.
Heaven has not denied or diminished its bounteous nourishment and
blessing,--for, in our own day, the wonders of Science have opened out
to our view such infinite reaches of the Ideal as should double and
treble our perception of the glories yet to be unfolded to us when we
have “shuffled off this mortal coil”--while at the same time, nothing
in all our changing phases of progress has yet occurred to alter the
simple and noble teaching of Christ, or to make such instruction
otherwise than sane, pure and helpful for every man, woman and child
ever born. Indeed, it would seem with the marvellous new penetration
we have gained into the secrets of the earth, air and light, that the
Infinite Creator is approaching His creature even more nearly, with
fresh pledges of help and promise such as His Messenger brought in the
words: “Fear not, little flock,--it is your Father’s good pleasure to
give you the Kingdom.” And to the Soul of the Nation that “Kingdom” is
everything. In that kingdom it hopes to find all it has loved and lost,
all it has striven for and failed to win, all that it has prayed for,
wept for, worked for. Yet to-day between that aspiring Soul and its
immortal Inheritance stand two deadly enemies,--a contentious Churchdom
and a capitalized Press,--the one hypocrite, the other materialist.
And the satirical demand “Do we Believe?” is but an echo of Pilate’s
question “What is truth?”--a question immediately followed by Truth’s
crucifixion. Nevertheless the Soul of the Nation--our nation, our
empire--is becoming aware of its enemies. It is instinctively conscious
of threatening evil, and is on the alert to save Itself if others
will not save it. But its way out of the labyrinth of difficulty will
probably be neither through Church nor Press,--nor will it be aided
by “revival” meetings or Salvationist assemblies. Its path will be
cloven straight,--not crookedly; for the British Nation, above all
other nations in the world, does most easily sicken of priestly Sham
and subsidized Journalism. And the sane, strong Soul of it--that Soul
which in its native intrinsic virtue, is devoutly God-fearing, pure and
true, will find means to shake off its pressing foes and stand free.
For priestcraft and dogma are like prison chains fastened upon the
progressive spirit of humanity, and they have nothing in common with
the simple teaching of Christ, which is the only real Christianity.


BUTLER & TANNER, THE SELWOOD PRINTING WORKS, FROME, AND LONDON.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FREE OPINIONS ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
